Title: Learning by Chatting? Investigating the Impact of Generative AI on Information Seeking and Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.11669v1

Published Time: Thu, 11 Jun 2026 00:33:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# Learning by Chatting? Investigating the Impact of Generative AI on Information Seeking and Learning 

# Shravika Mittal 1,* , Su Lin Blodgett 2,* , Q. Vera Liao 3,* 

> 1

Georgia Institute of Technology 

> 2

Mila - Qu´ ebec AI Institute 

> 3

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor smittal87@gatech.edu, sulin.blodgett@mila.quebec, veraliao@umich.edu 

Abstract 

Generative AI (GenAI) tools offer increasing opportunities for augmenting human cognitive tasks. Among these tasks, information seeking is being rapidly reshaped by GenAI tools, with potentially profound implications for learning and knowledge acquisition. To investigate these implications, we conducted a between-subjects field experiment in which par-ticipants pursued informal learning by seeking information through either ChatGPT or Google Search over a span of 8 days. Using a daily diary protocol, we gathered in-situ data on their information-seeking processes. Our findings show that participants in the ChatGPT group experienced di-minished agency in their information-seeking processes, as they offloaded much of the information selection to AI, and consequently experienced greater meta-cognitive load arising from this reduced sense of control. We further highlight two sources of distortion in information access when using Chat-GPT: biases in ChatGPT outputs, particularly towards pro-viding solution-oriented artifacts over principled knowledge; and systematic shifts in users’ information-seeking behaviors, whereby the conversational and socially-oriented interaction paradigm of current GenAI tools may inadvertently reduce exploration of the broader knowledge space. As a result, on average, participants in the ChatGPT group had worse learn-ing outcomes than those using Google, especially for higher-order critical learning. Our work suggests inherent tensions between offloading information seeking to AI and meaningful learning, and provides broader implications for understanding AI’s risks to human cognition. 

# Introduction 

In recent years, advances in Generative AI (GenAI) have shifted its role from primarily automating routine tasks to in-creasingly augmenting human capabilities (Wu et al. 2025). This shift is evident in its widespread adoption across do-mains of knowledge work (e.g., software engineering) (Suri et al. 2024), creative practices (Suri et al. 2024), and for-mal education (Nugroho et al. 2025). While GenAI tools can substantially improve productivity and efficiency, these gains are often realized through cognitive offloading (Shen and Tamkin 2026)—the practice of shifting effortful cogni-tive tasks to external aids. 

Copyright © 2026, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved. 

> *

Work done while at Microsoft Research Montr´ eal. 

Among the various cognitive tasks, information seeking is one that has undergone a profound shift with GenAI-powered technologies. As users increasingly move away from the previously dominant paradigm of retrieval-based search to “ask ChatGPT,” they are offloading much of the mental labor involved in information seeking to chatbots and answer engines (Shah and Bender 2022). In particular, GenAI tools offer advanced information synthesis capabil-ities (such as summary generation), combined with natural language understanding capabilities to help process flexible and highly specified queries. While these affordances can support rapid information look-up, they also offload critical cognitive processes, such as selecting, evaluating, and veri-fying information, to AI systems (Hirvonen et al. 2024). Information seeking is foundational to many downstream cognitive tasks such as learning, decision-making, problem solving, and creativity (Shah and Bender 2022; Spatharioti et al. 2025). Consequently, shifts in how users seek informa-tion through GenAI tools may influence subsequent cogni-tive outcomes. In particular, emerging evidence in education suggests that unconstrained use of popular GenAI tools such as ChatGPT can impair learning. For example, in classroom settings, heavier use of ChatGPT has been associated with poorer academic performance (Bastani et al. 2024), as GenAI tools can automate or accelerate answer-finding and task completion at the expense of deep conceptual understanding and genuine learning (Qu et al. 2025). Unlike prior work focused on formal educational settings, we examine GenAI’s impact on informal learning , a mode of learning through which individuals acquire knowledge and skills in everyday contexts (Qian, Fu, and Zhou 2025). Whether to develop an artistic skill, learn a new language, or acquire practical life skills, individuals often rely on infor-mal, self-directed pursuits mediated by information systems. While these learning pathways were once defined by search engines—studied under the paradigm of “searching as learn-ing” (Ghosh, Rath, and Shah 2018)—and social media plat-forms (Sengupta 2020), they are increasingly being reshaped by GenAI tools (Terzimehi´ c, B¨ uhler, and Kasneci 2025; Lira et al. 2025). Crucially, informal contexts lack the institu-tional guardrails and instructional oversight found in formal settings, making users more likely to offload cognitive ef-forts that may be essential for building durable expertise. To understand the mechanisms through which GenAI 

> arXiv:2606.11669v1 [cs.HC] 10 Jun 2026

tools (and their unique affordances) may impact knowl-edge acquisition, we investigate the shifts in people’s information-seeking behaviors during informal learning in naturalistic settings. We conducted a between-subjects, lon-gitudinal field experiment (8 days) in which participants were randomly assigned to perform an informal learning task using either ChatGPT, a widely used GenAI tool (Ope-nAI 2022), or the conventional Google Search. In addition to measuring participants’ knowledge gain, we utilized a daily diary protocol to gather in-situ data about their information-seeking processes, and contrasted those for the two groups (ChatGPT vs. Google) through the lens of an information-seeking stage model (Ellis, Cox, and Hall 1993). Our work seeks to answer the following research questions: 

RQ1: How does the use of GenAI tools impact people’s in-formal learning outcomes? 

RQ2: How does the use of GenAI tools impact people’s information-seeking behaviors for learning? Our research demonstrates the risks of offloading information-seeking tasks to GenAI tools. With GenAI acting as a “filter” of knowledge spaces and providing fewer affordances for differentiating and assessing information, participants had diminished agency and control in their information-seeking processes, and experienced greater meta-cognitive load as a result of this diminished sense of control. In addition, we highlight two sources of distortion 

in information access. First, distortion may arise from biases within the technology itself: ChatGPT currently exhibits biases in output generation—towards generating solution-oriented artifacts over principled knowledge, while providing little transparency or controllability over these biases. Second, distortion can occur via systematic shifts in people’s information-seeking behaviors, in which the socially-oriented interaction paradigm of current GenAI tools, characterized by a “chat” interface and person-alization as popular design choices, may inadvertently narrow query scope and reduce exploration of the broader knowledge space. This diminished agency and distortion in information-seeking processes led to worse informal learning outcomes in the ChatGPT group, particularly for higher-order critical learning. 

# Background and Related Work 

## Generative AI and Cognitive Offloading 

Cognitive offloading refers to the use of physical actions or external tools to reduce the mental demands of a task (Risko and Gilbert 2016). People routinely offload cognitive efforts to digital systems in everyday contexts (Risko and Gilbert 2016). Most notably, with the wide adoption of information retrieval systems such as Google Search, people increasingly offload information storage, remembering where to find in-formation rather than the information itself (Sparrow, Liu, and Wegner 2011). Traditionally, such offloading has been understood as a way to redistribute cognitive effort, allow-ing individuals to outsource lower-level cognitive processes or sub-processes. Recent advances in GenAI introduce ex-panded forms of cognitive offloading. Unlike earlier digi-tal tools that primarily support low-level, narrowly scoped cognitive tasks, GenAI tools increasingly support interme-diate cognitive tasks such as synthesis, comprehension, and reasoning, and even automate complex cognitive workflows such as planning, decision-making, and creativity. In other words, GenAI tools are increasingly integrated into human thinking processes, and in some cases, may even be replac-ing human thinking altogether (Lee et al. 2025). These shifts have spurred great public and academic interest in examining GenAI’s implications for human cognition, especially in knowledge work (Budzy´ n et al. 2025) and educational settings (Walker and Vorvoreanu 2025). A series of studies has examined how the use of popular GenAI tools impacts specific cognitive tasks such as student learning (Yang, Hsu, and Wu 2025), decision-making (Spatharioti et al. 2025), creativity (Kumar et al. 2025), and critical thinking (Lee et al. 2025). A few common observations have emerged from this literature. First, the use of GenAI tools involves cognitive offloading and may therefore lead to reductions in overall cognitive effort and engagement, including meta-cognitive activities (Lee et al. 2025). This is further evidenced by a study comparing EEG-based brain activity among participants using ChatGPT, a search engine, and no external tools (Kosmyna et al. 2025). Second, this bypassing of cognitive effort impairs knowl-edge and skill acquisition (Bastani et al. 2024; Walker and Vorvoreanu 2025; Qu et al. 2025), contributes to deskilling (Macnamara et al. 2024), and creates psycholog-ical harms such as loss of agency and ownership of one’s work (Kosmyna et al. 2025). Even if GenAI tools are found to enable performance boosts in some contexts, studies com-monly show that knowledge workers and students do worse, compared to those not using AI from the beginning, when they lose access to these tools (Kumar et al. 2025). While situated in this broad research examining GenAI’s impact on human cognition, particularly learning and knowledge acquisition, we identify a gap in the literature where the specific link between the increasing use of GenAI tools for information seeking and learning outcomes is under-investigated. As we review below, information seek-ing is a foundational component of learning, especially in everyday informal learning contexts where structured in-struction and curricula are absent. Although GenAI offers greater opportunities for cognitive offloading than conven-tional retrieval-based search engines, especially through its information synthesis capabilities, information seeking re-mains a complex cognitive process whose transformation under GenAI warrants empirical examination. 

## Information-Seeking Behaviors and Learning 

In information science, a large body of work on “search-ing as learning” (Ghosh, Rath, and Shah 2018) shows that people use search engines not only to retrieve or look up in-formation, but also to engage in learning processes such as sense-making (Dervin et al. 1983) and bridging knowledge gaps (Shah and Bender 2022). In fact, the specific behaviors or actions people adopt during their search support differ-ent cognitive modes of learning (Rieh et al. 2016; Lee et al. 2015). For example, receptive learning—i.e., remembering and reproducing what is learned—is supported by behaviors like targeted fact retrieval. Critical learning—i.e., thinking differently with respect to one’s own viewpoints—is sup-ported by differentiating the value of information across multiple sources. Lastly, creative learning—i.e., generating new ideas or artifacts based on what is learned—is supported by sense-making. Therefore, scholars have looked at how search engines can be designed to better support search be-haviors that lead to improved learning outcomes (Allan et al. 2012; Agosti et al. 2014; Bates 1989). Many studies have produced models of information-seeking behaviors to elucidate how people retrieve infor-mation and to inform the design of better information sys-tems (Allam et al. 2019). For example, Ellis’s model of information-seeking behaviors (Ellis, Cox, and Hall 1993) identifies eight stages that people engage in when seek-ing information: starting, chaining, browsing, differenti-ating, monitoring, extracting, verifying, and ending. Wil-son’s model highlights that information-seeking behaviors are influenced by personal, social, and environmental fac-tors (Wilson 1999), while Kuhlthau’s model describes the interplay between affect and seeking behaviors (Kuhlthau 1991). These models have been used to study seeking be-haviors across various environments (Ge 2010). Choo, Det-lor, and Turnbull (1999) used Ellis’s model as an analytical lens to study knowledge workers’ information-seeking be-haviors on the web. Changes in information technologies are often followed by shifts in user behaviors (Mitra et al. 2014), with GenAI-powered applications representing the latest disruption (Hir-vonen et al. 2024). Moran, Rosala, and Brown (2025) found that the “AI overviews” panel appearing at the top of most search results captures users’ attention and discourages them from visiting the actual web pages. Vaithilingam, Zhang, and Glassman (2022) observed that participants prefer Copilot over search engines to initiate information seeking for pro-gramming tasks, but rely on human-vetted sources for in-formation verification. Studies report growing use of GenAI tools for learning in both formal and informal contexts, to support comprehension of complex concepts (Haindl and Weinberger 2024) and obtain personalized examples (Lira et al. 2025). Yet, we lack a systematic understanding of how 

this new generation of GenAI tools reshapes information-seeking behaviors that are essential for learning. To close this gap, we conducted a longitudinal field exper-iment with a diary study protocol comparing information-seeking behaviors using ChatGPT (a popular GenAI tool) and a conventional search engine. While researchers have begun to examine the differences between the two paradigms (Spatharioti et al. 2025; Sharma, Liao, and Xiao 2024), prior work focuses on controlled lab settings, limit-ing their external validity, especially for learning-related be-haviors and outcomes. The diary protocol allows us to col-lect in-situ data about how and why participants engage in all stages of information-seeking, which we analyze through the lens of Ellis’s stage model (Ellis, Cox, and Hall 1993). 

# Methods 

## Study Design 

We conducted a between-subjects, IRB-approved, longitudi-nal field experiment with a daily diary study protocol. Partic-ipants were recruited from Prolific (Section “Participants”), a crowdsourcing platform widely used for human-subjects experiments. Over a period of 8 days (excluding weekends), participants were asked to use the assigned technology to seek information to learn about “nutrition and meal plan-ning” (i.e., to perform an informal learning task)—a popular topic for informal learning (Terzimehi´ c, B¨ uhler, and Kasneci 2025). They were also encouraged to use (but were not re-stricted to) the technology for their other usual day-to-day information needs. They were randomly placed into one of two conditions, representing the assigned technology to use: • ChatGPT: a popular GenAI-powered application, with information support (“ ask anything ”) as one of its pri-mary functions. • Google: the long-standing popular search engine, which currently controls over 90% of the global search engine market (Global Stats 2025). Google Search recently in-troduced “AI Overviews” (Google 2025), a feature that uses GenAI to provide a snapshot of key information re-lated to users’ queries. To minimize the infusion of direct GenAI outputs in this condition, we asked participants to append “-ai” to every search query to temporarily remove the panel (Rasool 2024). By comparing ChatGPT with Google Search without AI overviews, we captured two distinct ends of the information-seeking spectrum, i.e., GenAI-driven vs. conventional ap-proaches. The field experiment included three components: • Onboarding; Pre-learning knowledge test: Participants consented to the study and completed (1) a demographics survey, (2) a pre-learning knowledge test to capture their baseline knowledge about the learning topic, and (3) ex-ample tasks to prepare for the daily diary study (see be-low). Refer to Appendix for the onboarding survey. • Diary study: Following onboarding, each day for eight days, participants were asked to complete two tasks as part of the diary study: (1) Informal learning task : Every morning, we provided a guiding prompt, asking partic-ipants to learn about a subtopic related to the informal learning topic (see below). They were required to use the assigned technology for at least 10 minutes and could use it however they preferred. While completing the learning task, they were asked to upload screenshots for any num-ber of interactions with the technology and comment on them; (2) Diary entry task : After completing the learning task, participants were required to submit a diary entry reflecting on their information-seeking activities for the day. They were asked to reflect on (a) how they sought information to complete the learning task and (b) at least one additional instance of information seeking. 1

> 1For the scope of this paper, we only focused on participants’ responses to the first diary entry prompt.

• Post-learning knowledge test: Post experiment, partici-pants completed a knowledge test designed to assess their learning outcomes. 

Informal Learning Task. We selected an informal learn-ing task centered on acquiring a practical life skill (Qian, Fu, and Zhou 2025)—specifically, to learn about “nutrition and meal planning.” This topic fits the criteria of informal learn-ing as it is self-directed, potentially personally relevant, re-quires active information seeking, and allows people to con-struct knowledge in informal contexts. Selecting this topic also enabled us to create a knowledge test and measure par-ticipants’ learning outcomes, suitable for answering RQ1. To facilitate learning over the eight days, we created broad daily guiding prompts, outlined in the Appendix (Sec-tion “Guiding Prompts”), in reference to beginner-friendly, highly-rated, and heavily registered relevant courses (Felix Harder 2025a,b). For example, over the course of the eight days, participants were progressively asked to learn about macronutrients, how to plan meals tailored to a specific fit-ness goal, and strategies for eating healthy when traveling. 

Diary Study Protocol. Diary studies provide an oppor-tunity to collect data on participants’ situated practices in naturalistic settings over an extended period of time, while minimizing recall bias, making them particularly suited for RQ2 (Bolger, Davis, and Rafaeli 2003). After completing the learning task and before the end of the day, participants were asked to spend at least 20 minutes writing diary en-tries reflecting on their information-seeking activities. To de-sign our diary entry protocol (Appendix), we drew on prior work (Hiniker et al. 2016). The protocol asked participants to answer two open-ended questions: to (1) elaborate on how they sought information to learn about the day’s subtopic us-ing the assigned technology; and (2) describe how they ad-dressed at least one additional information need. Under each question, we added prompts to guide participants to describe how they used the technology, what they learned and how they arrived at it, any challenges they encountered, the steps taken to address them, and their overall experience seeking information. We took several measures to ensure good qual-ity diary data, including daily review of submissions, partic-ipant feedback, and safeguards against AI-generated entries (Appendix Section “Diary Study: Quality Control”). 

## Quantitative Measurement: Learning Outcome Score (RQ1) 

Knowledge Test. We operationalized Bloom’s taxon-omy (Anderson and Krathwohl 2001) to design a knowl-edge test (Appendix Section “Knowledge Test”) that mea-sured participants’ different levels of learning on the as-signed topic following the eight-day study (see “Background and Related Work” for the learning levels). Bloom’s tax-onomy is widely used in education to characterize differ-ent levels of learning objectives by cognitive complexity (from low to high): remembering, understanding, applying, evaluating and creating. To measure participants’ receptive learning outcomes , we gathered (with minor modification) multiple-choice questions from relevant courses on Udemy that focused on remembering, recalling, and understanding key concepts. To measure critical learning outcomes , we de-signed a mix of multiple-choice and open-ended questions, asking participants to apply, analyze, or evaluate certain con-cepts based on what they had learned. For instance, partic-ipants were asked to critically evaluate two meal plans ac-cording to their nutritional quality. Relevant course materi-als, e.g., meal plans and end of course quizzes, from Udemy were used to create these questions. Finally, to measure cre-ative learning outcomes , we asked participants to create an artifact: in our case, a three-day meal plan. We iteratively refined this knowledge test using feedback and responses from 11 pilot participants. Adjustments in-cluded removing questions that were answered correctly by a majority of the participants using just their baseline knowl-edge, and making minor tweaks to reduce ambiguity in the open-ended questions. We also ensured that obtaining the in-formation needed to answer the questions required effort in both conditions (e.g., it could not be found in the first sen-tences or titles displayed when querying ChatGPT or Google Search with a relevant subtopic). 

Scoring the Knowledge Test. The knowledge test con-sisted of nine multiple-choice and four open-ended ques-tions. Since the multiple-choice questions were directly taken from courses on Udemy, we were able to score partic-ipants’ responses against the course-provided ground truth using a binary correct (1), incorrect (0) scale. Through multiple discussions and in reference to existing guidelines on nutrition (Mayo Clinic 2024; USDA 2020), we iteratively developed rubrics to score participants’ responses to the four open-ended questions, by first independently rat-ing responses from seven participants in each group, and then discussing and resolving disagreements. Responses to two of the questions (Q11, Q12) for evaluating artifacts (nu-trition labels and meal plans) were scored on a binary scale. Responses to the other two questions (Q13, Q14) for im-proving or creating a meal plan were scored on a 1–3 scale, with higher scores for better responses according to the de-signed rubric (Appendix Section “Rubric for Open-ended Questions”). Participants’ scores on all knowledge test ques-tions were summed to obtain their learning outcome score .

## Qualitative Analysis of Diary Entries (RQ2) 

To answer RQ2, we analyzed participants’ responses to the first diary entry prompt, where they described how they sought information to complete the daily informal learning task. Prior work has proposed a range of models to char-acterize people’s information-seeking behaviors (Ellis, Cox, and Hall 1993; Kuhlthau 1991; Wilson 1999). Among these, Ellis’s model offers a particularly suitable analytical lens for our study, as while other models emphasize contextual or af-fective factors governing information seeking, Ellis’s model focuses on observable behaviors, i.e., how information seek-ers interact in an information environment. Ellis’s model proposes eight behaviors people may en-gage in during their information-seeking processes: starting (initiating information seeking ), chaining ( following con-nections to pursue a line of inquiry ), browsing ( casually seeking information in potential areas of interest ), differ-entiating ( using known differences to filter information ), monitoring ( regularly following particular sources ), extract-ing ( selectively identifying relevant information ), verifying (checking the correctness of information ), and ending ( wrap-ping up ). It has been adopted to study behaviors of dif-ferent user populations within varied information environ-ments, both digital and offline (Choo, Detlor, and Turnbull 1999; Ganie et al. 2019; Chen and Feng 2024). Using Ellis’s model as a guiding framework, the first author conducted a preliminary thematic analysis of a subset of diary entries. Although the analysis began with a deductive coding-based approach, several sub-codes were generated inductively to capture participants’ actions at a more granular level. These sub-codes further emerged as a consequence of the dis-tinct ways in which participants engaged with ChatGPT or Google Search. Following this, the first author met with the other co-authors to discuss, refine, and finalize the coding framework. The final framework is summarized in Table 1. After finalizing the codes and their definitions, the first author conducted a thematic analysis of participants’ en-tries from days 2 to 8. Entries from day 1 were intention-ally excluded, as participants were still familiarizing them-selves with the writing process. In total, 98 entries from the ChatGPT condition and 140 entries from the Google condi-tion were analyzed (with 7 entries missing from the Google condition). The difference in the number of entries across groups is due to the differing number of participants who completed the study in each group (see below). 

## Participants 

Recruitment. In total, we invited 144 participants on Pro-lific to complete a preliminary screening survey. Among those that fit our participation criteria (below), 80 were invited to participate in the experiment, recruited in two batches spaced one week apart (N1=50; N2=30). The sec-ond batch was recruited to account for participant attrition in the first batch (see below). The screening survey identified participants who (1) were moderate users of GenAI, (2) had moderate knowledge about and interest in “nutrition and meal planning” (the in-formal learning task), and (3) were likely to engage in in-formal learning. These criteria were intended to filter poten-tial outlier behaviors, avoid floor and ceiling effects when measuring learning outcomes, ensure that participants en-gaged in the informal learning task voluntarily, and support participant retention. We also disclosed the topical focus of the experiment and screened out participants who might not feel comfortable seeking nutrition-related information. Par-ticipants were compensated up to $105 ; $8 per day over a 10-day period for completing 30-minute daily tasks, and 

$25 for a 45-minute semi-structured interview. Compensa-tion was provided on a daily basis. Of the 40 participants in each condition, 14 in the Chat-GPT condition and 21 in the Google condition completed the entire study. The high attrition rate can be attributed to the nature of a diary study (Ohly et al. 2010). While not statis-tically significantly different, the higher drop-out rate in the ChatGPT condition is consistent with our results that partici-pants in this group had more negative experiences and higher cognitive load. Participants who voluntarily dropped out ex-pressed difficulty with writing diary reflections, uploading screenshots, or sustaining participation over the full study period. To maintain data quality, we also removed partici-pants who consistently submitted low-quality diary entries despite receiving repeated feedback. We excluded data from participants who dropped out or were removed early. 

Background. During recruitment, we aimed to achieve a balanced demographic distribution across the two groups. Among participants in the ChatGPT and Google condi-tions, respectively, 42.86% and 19.05% identified as women, 57.14% and 76.19% identified as men, and 4.76% in the Google condition identified as non-binary. Age distributions were: 26–35 (21.43% and 23.81%), 36–45 (50.00% and 42.86%), 46–55 (21.43% and 23.81%), and above 55 (7.14% and 9.52%) for the ChatGPT and Google conditions, respec-tively. University or college was the most commonly re-ported level of education (42.86% and 71.43%), followed by high school (28.56% and 23.81%), and graduate degree (14.29% and 4.76%). During onboarding, participants completed a pre-learning knowledge test. This consisted of three multiple-choice questions (scores ranged from 0–3) from a subset of the final knowledge test (Q4, Q5, and Q8). We included only a subset of questions to keep the onboarding process at a reasonable length and to minimize potential recall effects during the final post-learning assessment. A Welch’s t-test revealed no significant differences in the pre-learning topi-cal knowledge between the two groups ( t-statistic: 0.647 , p-value ( p): 0.261 ). On average, participants in the ChatGPT group scored 1.64 (standard deviation (SD): 0.72 ), and par-ticipants in the Google condition scored 1.48 (SD: 0.73 ). 

# Results 

## Impact of GenAI on Learning (RQ1) 

Learning Outcome Score. Given that the two groups started with comparable baseline knowledge on the assigned topic, we performed a Welch’s t-test to compare partici-pants’ learning outcome scores as measured by the post-learning knowledge test. On average, participants in the ChatGPT and Google conditions scored 11 .62 (SD: 2.32 )and 12 .86 (SD: 2.21 ), respectively. The test did not reach statistical significance but indicates a trend that participants in the ChatGPT condition had worse learning outcomes than those in the Google condition ( t-statistic: −1.523 , p: 0.069 ). 

Question-level Analysis Next, since the questions were designed to cover different aspects (i.e., subtopics and lev-els of learning), we performed an exploratory, question-level analysis to examine on which aspects participants in the two groups showed different learning effects. Specifically, for each multi-choice question, we performed a Fisher’s exact test, recommended for comparing binary outcomes within small samples, on participants’ answer correctness between the ChatGPT and Google conditions. This analysis revealed that participants in the Google group were significantly more likely to correctly answer two of the multiple-choice ques-tions designed to assess critical learning, i.e., application or evaluation of concepts learned. First, one of these questions (Q8) required participants to apply their knowledge and interpret a given nutrition label. In the post-learning knowledge test, a significantly smaller proportion of participants in the ChatGPT condi-tion answered Q8 correctly, compared to those in the Google group ( 57% vs. 95% ; odds ratio: 0.07 ; Fisher’s p: 0.01 ). This difference was not significant when the participants at-tempted the same question in the pre-learning knowledge test ( 64% vs. 62% ; odds ratio: 0.56 ; Fisher’s p: 0.47 ). Based on qualitative analysis of participants’ diary entries on the day they were assigned a subtopic relevant to Q8 (day 6), the ChatGPT group’s worse performance could be attributed to their more limited exposure to realistic and diverse exam-ples of nutrition labels. For example, one participant noted (P6; ChatGPT), “while learning with ChatGPT, one aspect I found unsatisfying was the lack of visual examples, which made it harder to apply the advice directly,” while another reflected (P7; ChatGPT), “I wish [ChatGPT] could give me an example of a real nutrition label to gain more practical knowledge.” This limitation forced some participants to en-gage in additional information-seeking activities from other channels: “I paired the guidance with labels from products in my pantry” and “I will now try [to get examples of some real nutrition labels] using Google.” 

Next, the other question (Q7) required participants to compare and evaluate animal and plant sources of pro-tein. Again, a significantly smaller proportion of partici-pants in the ChatGPT condition answered correctly com-pared to those in the Google condition ( 21% vs. 57% ; odds ratio: 0.21 ; Fisher’s p: 0.04 ). This difference could stem from content bias within ChatGPT: in the diary entries, par-ticipants reflected that ChatGPT by default provided meat-based sources of protein. For example, one participant (P3; ChatGPT) noted “[ChatGPT] automatically assumes that everyone eats meat.” Taken together, these limited and bi-ased outputs provided by ChatGPT, combined with par-ticipants’ reduced exploration and agency in learning, as discussed in the qualitative results below, may have con-tributed to their worse learning outcomes, particularly those for higher-level critical learning. 

## Impact of GenAI on Information-Seeking Behaviors (RQ2) 

As described earlier, we conducted a thematic analysis of participants’ diary entries using the coding framework sum-marized in Table 1. nC /nG represents the number of en-tries from participants in the ChatGPT/Google condition that mentioned the information-seeking behavior or code. These numbers should not be interpreted as quantitative measurements, but serve to guide our attention towards how information-seeking behaviors differed in the two condi-tions. We present the main contrasts below. 

Reduced Querying Scope in the ChatGPT Condition. 

The frequencies of the “Starting” codes (see Table 1) show that participants in the ChatGPT condition were more likely to begin their information-seeking with a narrow or speci-fied query, a behavior observed in 32 .65% of their entries (nC =32/98) compared to only 3.57% of entries from Google participants ( nG=5/140). This suggests that interacting with ChatGPT may have constrained participants’ information-seeking trajectories and reduced their exploration of the knowledge space from the very beginning. The narrower start happened in two ways: First, instead of seeking a general overview of the informal learning topic, participants tailored their conversational queries to get spe-cific, personally relevant information (see excerpt below): “I used ChatGPT to learn about macronutrients, specifically, by asking how much of each a person should consume per day by providing a rough esti-mate of my height, weight and activity levels.” – Chat-GPT participant (P3) This behavior could be attributed to the conversational in-terface invoking a social interaction-oriented schema (Lee, Kiesler, and Forlizzi 2010): “[feels] as if I am having a con-versation” and “led to an interesting conversation.” In some cases, participants even referred to it as a nutritional coach: 

“It felt as though I was getting a nutritional coach for free.” 

In contrast, participants in the Google condition started their information-seeking process with a broader query: one par-ticipant noted, “I searched how much of each macronutrient is recommended for a balanced meal.” 

Second, ChatGPT’s interface affordance—a chat-based UI enabling easy revisiting of prior interactions—made par-ticipants more inclined to continue their previous interac-tions rather than initiating a completely new query: “To learn about today’s topic, I simply opened my prior interaction with ChatGPT and asked it to sum-marize all the lessons learned so far.” – ChatGPT par-ticipant (P3) Moreover, even when participants began with broad queries, ChatGPT’s context retention and personalization limited exploration: “I asked ChatGPT how much of each macronutrient one should have. Since my information was saved from yesterday, it gave me a personalized guide.” – ChatGPT participant (P11) In short, certain affordances of ChatGPT, including conver-sational interactions and easy access to and personalization based on past interactions, can constrain what people choose to query (Shah and Bender 2022), reducing knowledge ex-ploration. This echoes prior findings that conversational in-teractions can bias people towards issuing personal, opin-ionated, and highly specified inputs, potentially reinforcing “information bubbles” (Sharma, Liao, and Xiao 2024). 

Reduced Information Differentiation and Verification in the ChatGPT Condition. Participants in the ChatGPT condition reported fewer instances of differentiating infor-mation, i.e., assessing (and filtering) information based on specific criteria (e.g., personal relevance, credibility, type of information need) and their indicators (“Differentiating” in Table 1, 43 /125 instances in ChatGPT/Google conditions). First of all, they applied a narrower set of criteria to filter information, relying almost entirely on personal relevance: Behavior (or Code) Description nC nG %C %G

Starting (broad) Beginning with exploratory, wide-ranging queries to serve as starting points for the information-seeking process. 

66 135 67 .35 96 .43 

Starting (narrow) Beginning with specified, focused queries (e.g., tailored to per-sonal preferences or well-defined needs) to serve as starting points for the information-seeking process. 

32 5 32 .65 3.57 

Chaining (self-initiated) Following a line of inquiry by using follow-up queries, links, or citations that build on previously retrieved information. 

36 39 36 .73 27 .86 

Chaining (technology-mediated) Following a line of inquiry by using queries, links, or cita-tions suggested by the technology (e.g., via ChatGPT-suggested follow-up prompts, a previous interaction, or ‘ people also search for” panel in Google). 

4 7 4.08 5.00 Browsing Casually seeking information in potential areas of interest, with-out a specific information need. 

9 62 9.18 44 .29 

Differentiating (based on personal relevance) Using indicators of personal relevance to filter information. 43 68 43 .88 48 .57 

Differentiating (based on credibil-ity) Using indicators of credibility to filter information. 0 43 0 30 .71 

Differentiating (based on type of information need) Using indicators of the type of information needed (e.g., level of detail, format, topic) to filter information. 

0 14 0 10 .00 

Monitoring Regularly following particular sources of information (e.g., a trusted source, or a source encountered earlier). 

0 26 0 18 .57 

Extracting (information) Selectively identifying relevant fundamental or principle-oriented information. 

65 136 66 .33 97 .14 

Extracting (artifacts) Selectively identifying artifact-oriented information, such as meal plans, grocery lists, or nutrient-intake trackers. 

46 9 46 .94 6.43 

Expressing an intent to verify Indicating an intention to verify information, without actually performing the verification action. 

3 0 3.06 0

Verifying (via another source) Checking the correctness of information by consulting another source, such as a different information channel or another web-page. 

3 27 3.06 19 .29 

Verifying (via prior knowledge) Checking the correctness of information via prior knowledge. 4 4 4.08 2.86 

Ending (Satisfied) Concluding the information-seeking process with overall satis-faction (information need was met), even if minor frustrations or interruptions were expressed. 

86 125 87 .76 89 .29 

Ending (Unsatisfied) Concluding the information-seeking process with clear dissat-isfaction, as the information need remained unmet. 

12 15 12 .24 10 .71 

Table 1: Summary of the codebook used to study participants’ information-seeking behaviors as described in their diary entries. 

nC /nG represents the number of entries from ChatGPT/Google participants. %C /%G represents the percentage of total entries from each group that described a given behavior. We analyzed 98 /140 diary entries from the ChatGPT/Google groups. “I no longer eat meat, so [...] I focused on the vege-tarian foods that were recommended by ChatGPT.” – ChatGPT participant (P12) On the other hand, participants in the Google condition considered additional indicators, such as source credibility and the type of information need to filter: “I looked for sources that I know to be reputable [...] I clicked on an NIH result.” – Google participant (P7) These differences in information differentiation can be attributed to offloading the information selection process to ChatGPT’s generative capabilities, and ChatGPT provid-ing fewer affordances for people to make their own selec-tion. While intended to provide fast and convenient informa-tion access, this may deprive information seekers of control over their own information-seeking processes. For example, some participants in the ChatGPT condition expressed a re-duced sense of control, and noted that they were unable to learn in the ways they would normally prefer: “I prefer to seek out my own sources. Using [Chat-GPT] is just not what I would prefer. [When learning] I like to read as much or as little detail as I would like.” – ChatGPT participant (P2) In contrast, participants in the Google condition noted that the ability to differentiate information sources based on their information needs gave them greater control over what to consume. For instance, one participant highlighted the abil-ity to switch sources depending on whether they sought gen-eral advice or more nuanced, scientific information: “I used a Reddit thread and a blog, which worked well for tips and advice, but earlier in the week, when I was searching for information on macronutrients and sci-entific topics, these sources were less helpful. I was able to adjust my sources accordingly as my informa-tion needs changed.” – Google participant (P7) Next, in the verifying stage (after information extraction), there were only seven instances where ChatGPT participants checked the accuracy of the information. They either did so by consulting another source (three instances, two by the same participant), such as referring to official health-related web pages (e.g., “cross-referenced some of the suggestions with official health websites” ) or by relying on their own prior knowledge (four instances; e.g., “I have also heard that mentioned elsewhere” ). Interestingly, a few reflections mentioned an intent to verify the information obtained (three instances); however, they did not describe engaging in the actual verification behavior. Such an intent was expressed as skepticism about how ChatGPT worked (e.g., “I am not sure how accurate that is since the data is probably from 2023” )and whether the information provided by it could be trusted (e.g., “[seeking health-related information] is not something I [would] trust a chatbot with right now” ). Meanwhile, as reflected in the frequency of the “Verify-ing” code (Table 1), participants in the Google condition verified information more frequently ( 31 instances). Partici-pants often did so by consulting multiple web pages: “I relied on an article from a website I considered re-liable. It all looked legitimate, but I fact-checked to be sure. [...] I looked at several other websites quickly.” – Google participant (P6) Overall, these findings suggest a shift toward a more pas-sive form of learning (Bonwell and Eison 1991) in the Chat-GPT condition, as ChatGPT provides synthesized informa-tion in its output at the cost of taking away information seek-ers’ agency in filtering, assessing, and selecting information. This not only results in diminished sense of control over one’s learning process, but can also be especially detrimental to critical and creative learning outcomes (Rieh et al. 2016). 

ChatGPT Reduced Extraction of Fundamental or Principle-Oriented Information. As shown by the fre-quencies of the “Extracting” codes in Table 1, participants in the ChatGPT condition were less likely to extract funda-mental or principle-oriented information (i.e. the underlying principles for how things should be done and why, such as information about the recommended amounts of macronutri-ents) as takeaways from their information-seeking process. 

66 .33% (nC =65/98) entries from ChatGPT participants de-scribed this behavior, compared to 97 .14% (nG=136/140) of entries from participants in the Google group. They were more likely to extract solution-oriented, artifact-based in-formation, such as meal plans, grocery lists, or nutrient-intake PDF trackers, compared to the Google group (“Ex-tracting (artifacts)” in Table 1); this behavior was observed in 46 .94% (nC =46/98) of entries from ChatGPT partici-pants, compared to only 6.43% (nG=9/140) of entries from the Google group. Even when a participant queried to obtain principle-oriented information, such as recommended macronutrient amounts for a balanced meal, ChatGPT provided a sample meal plan, followed by a suggested grocery list: “I asked ChatGPT how much of each macronutrient one should have for a balanced meal. It gave me a balanced meal plan. [...] It asked if I’d want a grocery list, which it provided.” – ChatGPT participant (P11) By contrast, a similar query by a participant in the Google group led them to learn about the principles of recommended amounts of macronutrients: “I searched how much of macronutrients are needed for a balanced meal. A dietitian blog explained: carbs (45% to 65% of total calories), protein [...] and fats [...], for an average diet.” – Google participant (P6) Receiving solution- or artifact-oriented information may also lead participants to expect to rely on ChatGPT for situa-tions where they need to apply the knowledge, reducing their motivation to develop the expertise in themselves (Cronin-Golomb and Bauer 2023), as shown by the quote from the same participant (P11): “I plan to use ChatGPT, even after this study, to create meal plans for me. It has always been overwhelming for me to do so.” – ChatGPT participant (P11) In short, ChatGPT currently exhibits a bias towards gener-ating solution-oriented artifacts, rather than principle-based information to allow someone to build fundamental knowl-edge about how things should be done and why. This bias could potentially be a by-product of training ChatGPT as a product targeting knowledge workers who may rely heavily on artifact generation (e.g., programming assistance, writing support), making it a mismatch for learning purposes. 

Unsatisfied Ending from Meta-cognitive Load in the ChatGPT Condition. Participants in the ChatGPT con-dition were slightly more likely to end their information-seeking process expressing dissatisfaction (“Ending (Unsat-isfied)” in Table 1). The code was observed in 12 .24% of en-tries from participants in the ChatGPT group ( nC = 12 /98 ), compared to 10 .71% of entries from those in the Google group ( nG = 15 /140 ). In the ChatGPT condition, many unsatisfactory endings were rooted in meta-cognitive load and frictions (Tankele-vitch et al. 2024)—i.e., the extra mental effort required to monitor and attempt to control one’s information-seeking process and the frustrations from failures in doing so: “I asked: shouldn’t a person consult a doctor before making any major changes. I was frustrated when it said it’s good to consult a doctor but not necessary. [...] I don’t agree with this. I got more direct and ex-pressed my concerns [...], asking ChatGPT if it was okay for it to provide that advice. Again, it hedged to say that it tries to provide information that does not harm anyone. [...] Using ChatGPT was frustrating and I just left the chat.” – ChatGPT participant (P2) Due to a lack of affordances for controlling information selection from ChatGPT’s outputs, the main path through which one can control their information seeking is prompt-ing and re-prompting. However, prompting remains an un-predictable task where users do not always get the intended output (the right content in the right format), referred to as the “instruction gap” (Subramonyam et al. 2024), as illus-trated in the excerpt below: “ChatGPT chose to provide two separate answers this time. It provided the information in a different layout, which I found confusing. It made me second-guess my query.” – ChatGPT participant (P8) More often than not, this burden on users led them to question their own capability for using ChatGPT: “Users have to learn how to use ChatGPT. [...] I tried my best to then ask a basic query: how to go about los-ing weight, but the assistant again gave me responses that included information on both losing weight AND gaining muscle.” – ChatGPT participant (P4) In some instances, the inability to obtain information in a desirable format led participants to abandon their information-seeking altogether: “[ChatGPT] listed the macronutrient quantity in grams. I was confused, as I have no idea how to mea-sure food in grams. [...] This was of no use to me.” – ChatGPT participant (P7) In the ChatGPT condition, even when information needs were met in the end (among those who expressed satis-faction), participants experienced heightened meta-cognitive load because suggestions or follow-up prompts from Chat-GPT were distracting them from their learning process and they had to make a conscious effort to stay on track: “ChatGPT’s follow-up prompts were interruptive. They steered the conversation towards diet-related topics, even when I was asking more science-focused questions.” – ChatGPT participant (P6) “ChatGPT was ‘eager’ to give me a sample meal plan, even though I was asking about something else alto-gether. I declined.” – ChatGPT participant (P11) These results further demonstrate that participants in the ChatGPT condition experienced a diminished sense of con-trol in their information-seeking process. This placed high meta-cognitive demands and frictions on them to monitor, attempt to regain control over, or regulate their interactions to stay “on track” with their learning goals. Currently, Chat-GPT provides few affordances for users to meet these de-mands, leading to dissatisfaction and abandonment of the system. 

# Discussion 

Through a between-subjects, longitudinal field experiment using a diary study protocol, we found evidence that using ChatGPT for informal learning may lead to worse learn-ing outcomes than using conventional search engines, es-pecially for higher-order critical learning (Lee et al. 2015). Participants’ diary entries revealed that the worse learn-ing outcomes in the ChatGPT group can be attributed to their reduced exploration of the knowledge space and lack of agency in information selection, combined with limited and biased information provided by ChatGPT, leading to an overall more unsatisfactory learning experience from a di-minished sense of control. Reflecting on these observations, below we discuss two implications of cognitive offloading to AI for information seeking, learning, and broader contexts. 

## Fundamental Tensions between Cognitive Offloading and Learning 

Compared to conventional search engines, which arguably allow users to offload the cognitive tasks of information re-trieval and storage, GenAI tools’ synthesis capabilities can offload much of the extended processes of collecting, select-ing and assessing information to AI, resulting in diminished human agency and control over one’s own information-seeking process. While potentially bringing value via, e.g., improving the efficiency and potentially the quantity of in-formation access, this shift of agency may present funda-mental tensions for learning. As our qualitative results sug-gest, learners may lose the means and motivation to thor-oughly explore the knowledge space, miss opportunities to engage in information filtering and assessment, which are key to critical learning and developing durable knowl-edge, and become passive receivers of information, forming only surface-level understanding with an “illusion of knowl-edge” (Walker and Vorvoreanu 2025). Since agency and control play critical roles in learning, we also observe par-ticipants experiencing heightened meta-cognitive load and frustration, and overall unsatisfactory user experience with GenAI tools for learning purposes. Our results echo, and provide explanations for, recent lit-erature in the education field which finds that the “default” designs of GenAI tools, which are oriented towards cog-nitive offloading for productivity gain, combined with stu-dents’ unconstrained use without guardrails, are often detri-mental to learning (Bastani et al. 2024; Qu et al. 2025). No-tably, research efforts have emerged to develop dedicated, structured GenAI tools for education, which often focus on cognitive scaffolding instead of offloading, such as provid-ing feedback, prompting reflection, and engaging in Socratic questioning to facilitate structured exploration of the knowl-edge space (Tabarsi et al. 2025). However, the development and adoption barriers for these structured tools remain steep, especially as unstructured, “general-purpose” GenAI tools such as ChatGPT are easily accessible. Outside formal education settings, people are even more likely to continue using these general-purpose GenAI tools for knowledge and skill acquisition, in both planned and unplanned fashions. To preserve and even enhance these opportunities for informal learning we suggest two areas to develop new sets of affordances in GenAI tools in ad-dition to the scaffolding approaches explored in educa-tional technology research. One area is to provide affor-dances for users to understand and control which processes or subprocesses—e.g., which of Ellis’ model’s information-seeking stages—are offloaded to AI. Such modular sup-port would allow GenAI tools to be flexibly configured to meet different goals (e.g., learning versus productivity) and the demands of diverse cognitive tasks. Second, the (some-times unbounded) opportunities to offload cognitive tasks to AI call for additional meta-cognition support (Tankelevitch et al. 2024): improving users’ awareness of their own goals, processes, capabilities while using AI, and—in learning con-texts in particular—their self-regulation capabilities (Ertmer and Newby 1996) to take charge of their own learning goals, monitoring their progress, and managing their motivation, emotions, and behaviors, including their use of AI. 

## GenAI’s Risks in Cognitive Distortion 

GenAI tools are often framed as opportunities for intelli-gence augmentation (Engelbart 2023), offloading some cog-nitive tasks to extend human capabilities. This framing often invokes the analogy of the introduction of calculators, which undoubtedly have extended people’s mathematical capaci-ties in everyday life. However, unlike calculators with direct control of input and deterministic output, our results high-light two forms of distortion risk—systematic change in the outcome of a cognitive process as compared to without AI— associated with cognitive offloading to GenAI: (1) distor-tions introduced through the generated outputs themselves, and (2) distortions introduced through systematic shifts in people’s interaction behaviors. Together, these distortions can reshape downstream cognitive tasks, learning processes, and broader patterns of information engagement. First, biases are inevitable with GenAI outputs. The gen-erative synthesis capability acts as “information filters” of a much broader information space, and these filters are not value-free, but laden with values and judgments of the tech-nology developers. For example, we observed that currently ChatGPT is biased towards generating solution-oriented ar-tifacts rather than principle-based information. This is likely influenced by the technology developers’ biases towards supporting artifact-oriented knowledge work tasks (e.g., coding or writing). As user logs of GenAI tools report heavy use towards knowledge work-related tasks (Suri et al. 2024; Handa et al. 2025), these usage patterns or user bases likely feed back into these technologies’ training and design de-cisions. Unfortunately, such a bias runs counter to the fun-damental purpose of learning, to gain principled knowledge about how and why (Lee et al. 2015). Problematically, these biases are often not understood, nor made transparent or controllable, leaving the distortion effects of cognitive load-ing potentially long-lasting but unexamined. Second, our results suggest that this distortion risk can also result from systematic shifts in people’s interaction be-haviors, i.e. what and how one offloads to AI. These behav-ioral shifts can inadvertently result from seemingly popular design choices of GenAI tools. For example, echoing prior work (Sharma, Liao, and Xiao 2024), we found that the so-cial, chat-based paradigm had unintended impacts on nar-rowing participants’ information querying. Certain technical affordances that have been extolled for the new generation of “companion”-like GenAI tools, such as context reservation, personalization, and proactive interactions, may risk further homogenizing people’s interaction with these tools. We urge future research to more carefully examine how various de-sign choices interfacing with people’s offloading of different cognitive tasks can create systematic shifts from how these tasks are performed without AI. 

## Limitations and Future Work 

We note several limitations of our study. First, owing to our study design, the informal learning task was not com-pletely self-directed or unstructured. Nevertheless, while we provided broad topical prompts to help initiate participants’ learning, we emphasized that these prompts were only meant as guidance (see Appendix), and participants were free to explore and engage with the task in ways that felt natural and meaningful to them. Second, we reported information-seeking behaviors at an aggregate level. Behaviors may be influenced by individual differences (O’Brien, Dickinson, and Askin 2017). Future work should investigate the in-terplay between individual characteristics and information-seeking behaviors. Further, behaviors may also be influ-enced by the information domain. For example, in high-stakes contexts such as healthcare, information-seeking be-haviors such as differentiation based on credibility or veri-fication may be more pronounced (Bhavnani 2002). In the future, scholars should consider how information-seeking behaviors may vary depending on the underlying domain. We used a diary study protocol to capture participants’ in-situ seeking behaviors. We acknowledge that these accounts may represent only some of these behaviors, as participants may not have documented every instance or fully articu-lated the nuances of their information-seeking process. Next, through this work, we do not make any causal claims link-ing information-seeking behaviors to learning outcomes. We provide a speculative discussion describing how certain be-haviors may have led to particular outcomes. Future work should investigate this relationship empirically. Lastly, par-ticipant attrition led to a small sample size. Nonetheless, our final sample remained within the recommended range for di-ary studies (Flaherty 2024). 

## Conclusion 

People seek information not only to retrieve facts, but to ac-quire knowledge and develop expertise. GenAI-powered ap-plications are increasingly mediating access to information, and, for many, replacing conventional search engines. This paradigm change involves offloading of the information-seeking process to AI. To understand how GenAI tools may reshape information seeking and impact learning, we conducted a between-subjects, longitudinal field experi-ment comparing participants using ChatGPT versus Google Search to pursue informal learning. We found that, by of-floading much of the information selection, the ChatGPT group had diminished agency in their information seeking and took a more passive role in learning. This presents fun-damental tensions with learning, which also manifested as heightened meta-cognitive demands and unsatisfactory user experience for the ChatGPT group to attempt to regain con-trol in their learning processes. The diminished agency led to, on average, worse learning outcomes in the ChatGPT group, accompanied by two sources of distortion that sys-tematically shifted their information access. First, ChatGPT exhibits a bias toward generating solution-oriented artifacts over principled knowledge about ‘how’ and ‘why.’ Second, the socially-oriented interaction paradigm of current GenAI tools may have unintended consequences in shifting peo-ple’s information-seeking behaviors. Popular design choices such as the “chat” interface and personalization may inad-vertently reduce exploration of the knowledge space. Ethical Considerations Statement 

The study design was approved by our organization’s in-ternal IRB and we obtained participant consent. Follow-ing guidelines provided by Prolific (Prolific 2025b), par-ticipants were compensated at an hourly wage of $15. We paid and approved the work of everyone who completed the study, regardless of whether their responses passed our qual-ity checks. We did not collect any personally identifiable information, except for participants’ Prolific IDs for com-pensation and communication purposes. All communication between the research team and participants was conducted anonymously via Prolific’s internal messaging system (Pro-lific 2025a). Participants were free to discontinue at any time without penalty. Participants were compensated on a daily basis for their contributions. All participant data were anonymized prior to analysis. 

# References 

Agosti, M.; Fuhr, N.; Toms, E.; and Vakkari, P. 2014. Eval-uation methodologies in information retrieval dagstuhl sem-inar 13441. In Acm sigir forum , volume 48, 36–41. ACM New York, NY, USA. Allam, H.; Bliemel, M.; Nassiri, N.; Toze, S.; Peet, L. M.; and Banerjee, R. 2019. A review of models of information seeking behavior. 2019 Sixth HCT Information Technology Trends (ITT) , 147–153. Allan, J.; Croft, B.; Moffat, A.; and Sanderson, M. 2012. Frontiers, challenges, and opportunities for information re-trieval: Report from SWIRL 2012 the second strategic work-shop on information retrieval in Lorne. In Acm sigir forum ,volume 46, 2–32. ACM New York, NY, USA. Anderson, L. W.; and Krathwohl, D. R. 2001. A taxonomy for learning, teaching, and assessing: A revision of Bloom’s taxonomy of educational objectives: complete edition . Ad-dison Wesley Longman, Inc. Bastani, H.; Bastani, O.; Sungu, A.; Ge, H.; Kabakcı, ¨ O.; and Mariman, R. 2024. Generative AI can harm learning. 

The Wharton School Research Paper .Bates, M. J. 1989. The design of browsing and berrypicking techniques for the online search interface. Online review ,13(5): 407–424. Bhavnani, S. K. 2002. Domain-specific search strategies for the effective retrieval of healthcare and shopping informa-tion. In CHI ’02 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI EA ’02, 610–611. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 1581134541. Bolger, N.; Davis, A.; and Rafaeli, E. 2003. Diary methods: Capturing life as it is lived. Annual review of psychology ,54(1): 579–616. Bonwell, C. C.; and Eison, J. A. 1991. Active learning: Cre-ating excitement in the classroom. 1991 ASHE-ERIC higher education reports. ERIC. Budzy´ n, K.; Roma´ nczyk, M.; Kitala, D.; Kołodziej, P.; Bugajski, M.; Adami, H. O.; Blom, J.; Buszkiewicz, M.; Halvorsen, N.; Hassan, C.; et al. 2025. Endoscopist deskilling risk after exposure to artificial intelligence in colonoscopy: a multicentre, observational study. The Lancet Gastroenterology & Hepatology , 10(10): 896–903. Chen, X.; and Feng, S. 2024. Analyzing Students’ Infor-mation Behavior in Generative AI-Supported Small Group Discussions. In Proceedings of the Eleventh ACM Confer-ence on Learning @ Scale , L@S ’24, 325–329. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9798400706332. Choo, C. W.; Detlor, B.; and Turnbull, D. 1999. Information Seeking on the Web–An Integrated Model of Browsing and Searching. Cronin-Golomb, L. M.; and Bauer, P. J. 2023. Self-motivated and directed learning across the lifespan. Acta Psychologica , 232: 103816. Dervin, B.; et al. 1983. An overview of sense-making re-search: Concepts, methods, and results to date. Ellis, D.; Cox, D.; and Hall, K. 1993. A comparison of the information seeking patterns of researchers in the physical and social sciences. Journal of documentation , 49(4): 356– 369. Engelbart, D. C. 2023. Augmenting human intellect: A con-ceptual framework. In Augmented education in the global age , 13–29. Routledge. Ertmer, P. A.; and Newby, T. J. 1996. The expert learner: Strategic, self-regulated, and reflective. Instructional sci-ence , 24(1): 1–24. Felix Harder. 2025a. Nutrition Certification Diploma: Diet Planning & Meal Prep. https://www.udemy.com/course/ nutrition-certification-diploma-diet-plan-meal-prep/. [Ac-cessed 09-11-2025]. Felix Harder. 2025b. Nutrition Masterclass: Build Your Perfect Diet & Meal Plan. https://www.udemy.com/course/ nutrition-masterclass-build-your-perfect-diet-meal-plan/. [Accessed 09-11-2025]. Flaherty, K. 2024. Diary Studies: Understanding Long-Term User Behavior and Experiences. https://www.nngroup.com/ articles/diary-studies/. [Accessed 10-09-2025]. Ganie, S. A.; et al. 2019. Information seeking behavior of faculty members and students in colleges of Kashmir region: ellis model approach. Ge, X. 2010. Information-seeking behavior in the digital age: A multidisciplinary study of academic researchers. Col-lege & Research Libraries , 71(5): 435–455. Ghosh, S.; Rath, M.; and Shah, C. 2018. Searching as Learn-ing: Exploring Search Behavior and Learning Outcomes in Learning-related Tasks. In Proceedings of the 2018 Confer-ence on Human Information Interaction & Retrieval , CHIIR ’18, 22–31. New York, NY, USA: Association for Comput-ing Machinery. ISBN 9781450349253. Global Stats. 2025. Search Engine Market Share World-wide. https://gs.statcounter.com/search-engine-market-share. [Accessed 09-11-2025]. Google. 2025. Google Search. https://search.google/ways-to-search/ai-overviews/. [Accessed 09-09-2025]. Haindl, P.; and Weinberger, G. 2024. Students’ experiences of using ChatGPT in an undergraduate programming course. 

IEEE Access , 12: 43519–43529. Handa, K.; Bent, D.; Tamkin, A.; McCain, M.; Durmus, E.; Stern, M.; Schiraldi, M.; Huang, S.; Ritchie, S.; Syverud, S.; Jagadish, K.; Vo, M.; Bell, M.; and Ganguli, D. 2025. Anthropic Education Report: How University Students Use Claude. Hiniker, A.; Suh, H.; Cao, S.; and Kientz, J. A. 2016. Screen Time Tantrums: How Families Manage Screen Media Expe-riences for Toddlers and Preschoolers. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys-tems , CHI ’16, 648–660. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450333627. Hirvonen, N.; Jylh¨ a, V.; Lao, Y.; and Larsson, S. 2024. Arti-ficial intelligence in the information ecosystem: Affordances for everyday information seeking. Journal of the Associa-tion for Information Science and Technology , 75(10): 1152– 1165. Janssens, K. A.; Bos, E. H.; Rosmalen, J. G.; Wichers, M. C.; and Riese, H. 2018. A qualitative approach to guide choices for designing a diary study. BMC medical research method-ology , 18(1): 140. Kosmyna, N.; Hauptmann, E.; Yuan, Y. T.; Situ, J.; Liao, X.-H.; Beresnitzky, A. V.; Braunstein, I.; and Maes, P. 2025. Your brain on ChatGPT: Accumulation of cognitive debt when using an AI assistant for essay writing task. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.08872 , 4. Kuhlthau, C. C. 1991. Inside the search process: Information seeking from the user’s perspective. Journal of the American society for information science , 42(5): 361–371. Kumar, H.; Vincentius, J.; Jordan, E.; and Anderson, A. 2025. Human creativity in the age of llms: Randomized experiments on divergent and convergent thinking. In Pro-ceedings of the 2025 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems , 1–18. Lee, H.-J.; Lee, J.; Makara, K. A.; Fishman, B. J.; and Hong, Y.-I. 2015. Does higher education foster critical and creative learners? An exploration of two universities in South Korea and the USA. Higher Education Research & Development ,34(1): 131–146. Lee, H.-P.; Sarkar, A.; Tankelevitch, L.; Drosos, I.; Rintel, S.; Banks, R.; and Wilson, N. 2025. The impact of genera-tive AI on critical thinking: Self-reported reductions in cog-nitive effort and confidence effects from a survey of knowl-edge workers. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems , 1–22. Lee, M. K.; Kiesler, S.; and Forlizzi, J. 2010. Reception-ist or information kiosk: how do people talk with a robot? In Proceedings of the 2010 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work , 31–40. Lira, B.; Rogers, T.; Goldstein, D. G.; Ungar, L.; and Duck-worth, A. L. 2025. Learning not cheating: AI assistance can enhance rather than hinder skill development. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.02880 .Macnamara, B. N.; Berber, I.; C ¸ avus ¸o˘ glu, M. C.; Krupinski, E. A.; Nallapareddy, N.; Nelson, N. E.; Smith, P. J.; Wilson-Delfosse, A. L.; and Ray, S. 2024. Does using artificial in-telligence assistance accelerate skill decay and hinder skill development without performers’ awareness? Cognitive Re-search: Principles and Implications , 9(1): 46. Mayo Clinic. 2024. Healthy meals start with planning. https://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy-lifestyle/nutrition-and-healthy-eating/in-depth/healthy-meals/art-20546806. [Accessed 09-11-2025]. Mitra, B.; Shokouhi, M.; Radlinski, F.; and Hofmann, K. 2014. On user interactions with query auto-completion. In 

Proceedings of the 37th international ACM SIGIR confer-ence on Research & development in information retrieval ,1055–1058. Moran, K.; Rosala, M.; and Brown, J. 2025. How AI Is Changing Search Behaviors. https://www.nngroup.com/ articles/ai-changing-search-behaviors/. [Accessed 08-09-2025]. Nugroho, A.; Andriyanti, E.; Widodo, P.; and Mutiaran-ingrum, I. 2025. Students’ appraisals post-ChatGPT use: Students’ narrative after using ChatGPT for writing. In-novations in Education and Teaching International , 62(2): 499–511. O’Brien, H. L.; Dickinson, R.; and Askin, N. 2017. A scop-ing review of individual differences in information seeking behavior and retrieval research between 2000 and 2015. Li-brary & Information Science Research , 39(3): 244–254. Ohly, S.; Sonnentag, S.; Niessen, C.; and Zapf, D. 2010. Di-ary studies in organizational research. Journal of Personnel Psychology .OpenAI. 2022. Introducing ChatGPT. https://openai.com/ index/chatgpt/. [Accessed 30-08-2025]. Prolific. 2025a. How can I contact participants? https: //researcher-help.prolific.com/en/article/8a2092. [Accessed 07-09-2025]. Prolific. 2025b. Prolific’s payment principles. https:// researcher-help.prolific.com/en/article/2273bd. [Accessed 07-09-2025]. Qian, Z.; Fu, J.; and Zhou, Y. 2025. Seeking a Sense of Meaning and Companionship in Life: Informal Learning on Douyin Among Chinese Older Adults. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. , 9(2). Qu, X.; Sherwood, J.; Liu, P.; and Aleisa, N. 2025. Genera-tive AI Tools in Higher Education: A Meta-Analysis of Cog-nitive Impact. In Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys-tems , CHI EA ’25. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9798400713958. Rasool, F. 2024. How to Turn Off AI Overview Results in Your Google Searches. https://www.howtogeek.com/turn-off-ai-overview-results-in-your-google-searches/. [Ac-cessed 09-11-2025]. Rieh, S. Y.; Collins-Thompson, K.; Hansen, P.; and Lee, H.-J. 2016. Towards searching as a learning process: A review of current perspectives and future directions. Journal of In-formation Science , 42(1): 19–34. Risko, E. F.; and Gilbert, S. J. 2016. Cognitive offloading. 

Trends in cognitive sciences , 20(9): 676–688. Sengupta, S. 2020. ’Learning to code in a virtual world’ A Preliminary Comparative Analysis of Discourse and Learn-ing in Two Online Programming Communities. In Compan-ion Publication of the 2020 Conference on Computer Sup-ported Cooperative Work and Social Computing , 389–394. Shah, C.; and Bender, E. M. 2022. Situating Search. In 

Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Human Information Interaction and Retrieval , CHIIR ’22, 221–232. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450391863. Sharma, N.; Liao, Q. V.; and Xiao, Z. 2024. Generative Echo Chamber? Effect of LLM-Powered Search Systems on Di-verse Information Seeking. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’24. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Ma-chinery. ISBN 9798400703300. Shen, J. H.; and Tamkin, A. 2026. How AI Impacts Skill Formation. arXiv:2601.20245. Sparrow, B.; Liu, J.; and Wegner, D. M. 2011. Google effects on memory: Cognitive consequences of having information at our fingertips. science , 333(6043): 776–778. Spatharioti, S. E.; Rothschild, D.; Goldstein, D. G.; and Hof-man, J. M. 2025. Effects of LLM-based Search on Decision Making: Speed, Accuracy, and Overreliance. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Comput-ing Systems , 1–15. Subramonyam, H.; Pea, R.; Pondoc, C.; Agrawala, M.; and Seifert, C. 2024. Bridging the gulf of envisioning: Cognitive challenges in prompt based interactions with llms. In Pro-ceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1–19. Suri, S.; Counts, S.; Wang, L.; Chen, C.; Wan, M.; Safavi, T.; Neville, J.; Shah, C.; White, R. W.; Andersen, R.; Buscher, G.; Manivannan, S.; Rangan, N.; and Yang, L. 2024. The Use of Generative Search Engines for Knowledge Work and Complex Tasks. arXiv:2404.04268. Tabarsi, B.; Yasir, T.; Reichert, H.; Tian, X.; Gadireddy, S.; Dimarco, C.; Briceno, D.; and Barnes, T. 2025. Herald of Advancement, Disruption, or Both: A Systematic Liter-ature Review on Student-Facing LLM Tools in Undergradu-ate Computing Education. Tankelevitch, L.; Kewenig, V.; Simkute, A.; Scott, A. E.; Sarkar, A.; Sellen, A.; and Rintel, S. 2024. The metacog-nitive demands and opportunities of generative AI. In Pro-ceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1–24. Terzimehi´ c, N.; B¨ uhler, B.; and Kasneci, E. 2025. Conver-sational AI as a Catalyst for Informal Learning: An Empir-ical Large-Scale Study on LLM Use in Everyday Learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.11789 .USDA. 2020. Dietary Guidelines for Americans. https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/sites/default/files/2021-03/Dietary Guidelines for Americans-2020-2025.pdf. [Accessed 25-11-2025]. Vaithilingam, P.; Zhang, T.; and Glassman, E. L. 2022. Ex-pectation vs. Experience: Evaluating the Usability of Code Generation Tools Powered by Large Language Models. In 

Extended Abstracts of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI EA ’22. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450391566. Walker, K.; and Vorvoreanu, M. 2025. Learning outcomes with GenAI in the classroom: A review of empirical evi-dence. Technical Report MSR-TR-2025-42, Microsoft. Wilson, T. D. 1999. Models in information behaviour re-search. Journal of documentation , 55(3): 249–270. Wu, S.; Liu, Y.; Ruan, M.; Chen, S.; and Xie, X.-Y. 2025. Human-generative AI collaboration enhances task perfor-mance but undermines human’s intrinsic motivation. Sci-entific Reports , 15(1): 15105. Yang, T.-C.; Hsu, Y.-C.; and Wu, J.-Y. 2025. The effec-tiveness of ChatGPT in assisting high school students in programming learning: evidence from a quasi-experimental research. Interactive Learning Environments , 33(6): 3726– 3743. Appendix Diary Entry Protocol 

## Prompt 1 

To help us understand how you used the assigned technology to learn about our provided topic for the day, please describe in detail what you did, for example the types of questions or queries you tried, what you learned and how you arrived there, any parts of the learning process that felt unsatisfying (or challenging) and how you addressed them, and anything else you would like to share about your overall experience learning with the technology. Below is a sample paragraph you can use as a template, but feel free to write it in your own words. To learn about the assigned topic, I [asked ChatGPT/used Google to search for] . Some examples of useful things I learned include . I learned these by asking [ChatGPT/Google] . While learning with [ChatGPT/-Google], one aspect I found unsatisfying or challenging was . To address this, I . Overall, I felt the learn-ing process using [ChatGPT/Google] was because .

## Prompt 2 

Besides the assigned topic, recall at least one other instance (even better if you can provide more) today where you sought information, whether by using [ChatGPT/Google] or other channels. Describe your information need (for what topic or question you needed to seek information), how you tried to satisfy this need (e.g., what sources, queries, or strategies you used, and why you chose them), what the out-come was, and how you felt about this information-seeking experience. Describe any parts of the information-seeking process that felt unsatisfying or challenging, and how you addressed them. 

# Diary Study: Quality Control 

One of the authors reviewed participants’ submitted diary entries to provide feedback—appreciating high-quality sub-missions and suggesting any improvements. We also ran a small-scale pilot to improve our protocol. Participants were explicitly instructed not to use any AI tools when writing di-ary entries, and the copy-paste functionality was disabled in the survey to prevent this. The first author conducted daily checks to ensure that the diary entries were reflective of what was asked for in the prompt and of sufficient quality. To fur-ther encourage participation, we sent friendly reminders to-wards the end of the day to submit the diaries. We allowed participants to skip submitting entries occasionally, i.e., up to two consecutive days, acknowledging that participants’ everyday responsibilities could prevent them from daily par-ticipation (Janssens et al. 2018). 

# Guiding Prompts 

Day 1: Hi! We hope that you are excited to start learning about nutrition and meal planning. As a reminder, the sub-topics we provide each day are simply guiding prompts. Feel free to explore and learn in a way that feels natural and meaningful to you. Let’s get started! Before you can plan a balanced meal, it’s important to understand the basics of macronutri-ents , which define what a healthy meal should include. Take some time today to learn about the different types of macronutrients, the roles they play in the body, and examples of nutrient-dense sources for each. Day 2: Now that you have gained a basic understanding of macronutrients, take some time to learn about how much of each macronutrient is recommended for a balanced meal. Explore how these recommendations can vary de-pending on one’s fitness goals, demographics, and activ-ity level. To make this more interesting to you, you may also seek recommendations for your own fitness goal, age, or activity level. Day 3: We hope you now have a good understanding of what makes up a balanced meal. Today, we invite you to ex-plore another key aspect of healthy meal planning: meal timing . When and how often should one consume differ-ent macronutrients? There is no universal rule, so learn about different approaches to meal timing and how they may influence energy levels, metabolism, and overall well-being. You may consider exploring a meal timing approach that fits your personal schedule and lifestyle. Day 4: Let’s bring together everything we’ve learned so far and 

focus on a specific fitness goal: building muscle . Take some time today to learn how to set up a meal plan that supports muscle growth, including key nutrients, meal timing, and calorie considerations. Next, focus on a different fitness goal: weight loss. 

Learn how to set up a meal plan that supports gradual, sustainable weight loss (without muscle loss), including key nutrients, meal timing, and calorie considerations. Day 5: It’s time to learn about meal prepping , i.e., practical strategies to turn meal plans into action. Meal prepping can help save time, reduce stress, and stay on track with one’s nutrition goals by ensuring that healthy, balanced meals are always within reach. Learn about different ap-proaches to meal prepping, such as batch cooking, ingre-dient prep, meal portioning. Also explore how grocery shopping plays a key role in successful meal prep: how planning ahead, making a clear shopping list, and choosing a variety of ingredients can set you up for an efficient, cost-effective week. Day 6: Take some time to learn how to read and interpret nutrition labels , a key skill for making informed food choices that align with your meal plan and health goals. Explore how to evaluate the nutritional profile of a prod-uct using food labels and learn which components are most important to pay attention to, such as serving size, calorie content, added sugars, saturated fats, and fiber. Also, learn how to use the ingredient list to identify prod-ucts worth buying or avoiding. Day 7: For today, try to learn some practical tips and strate-gies to continue eating healthy meals while traveling or on a budget . Sticking to a nutritious meal plan can feel challenging when one is away from home or trying to save money, but it is doable with the right approach. Feel free to explore strategies like making smart choices when eating out, drinking enough water, planning sim-ple, nutritious meals in advance, or shopping wisely. Day 8: As we conclude, take some time today to learn about how to set realistic, achievable goals for planning nu-tritious, healthy meals . Learn about approaches such as using SMART (specific, measurable, achievable, rel-evant, time-bound) goals, creating a sustainable, long-term routine, and tracking small wins to stay motivated. We hope that you found the everyday learning tasks to be fruitful, and that you are taking away some practical insights, tools, and skills to make healthy food choices. While our learning plan did not cover everything, we hope it gave you a strong foundation to continue explor-ing topics in nutrition, meal planning, and healthy living on your own beyond this study. Thank you for your time and participation! 

# Knowledge Test 

1. What are the three macronutrients? (used as an attention check) 

• Vitamins, Nutrients, and Omega 3 • Water, Fat and Carbohydrates • Protein, Fat, and Carbohydrates • I don’t know the answer 2. How much protein should an active athlete looking to build muscle consume on average? • 0.2 grams per pound of body weight • 0-0.3 grams per pound of body weight • 0.8-1 grams per pound of body weight • 5 grams per pound of body weight • I don’t know the answer 3. Which of the following is not a benefit of a high-protein diet? • Helps maintain and preserve muscle mass • Improved satiety and reduced hunger • Significant and rapid weight loss • Aids in recovery from training and physical activity • I don’t know the answer 4. When reading a nutrition label, what is the most impor-tant thing to check first? (used for pre-learning knowl-edge test as well) 

• Serving size • Total calories • Ingredient list • All the above • I don’t know the answer 5. Which of the following describes a practical approach to shopping for groceries? (used for pre-learning knowl-edge test as well) 

• Choose foods from the perimeter of the grocery store, as items stocked here tend to be less processed than other foods. • Prioritize organic foods (like an organic candy bar) even if they are more highly processed than non-organic foods (like a non-organic bunch of spinach). • Focus on purchasing foods stocked at eye-level on gro-cery store shelves, which are almost always less pro-cessed than other foods. • Choose foods with more ingredients, particularly if they include added vitamins and minerals. • Shopping while hungry tends to increase the purchas-ing of healthier, less processed foods. 6. How many calories are in 1 gram of carbohydrate, fat, or protein? • 4, 9, 4 • 3, 9, 6 • 7, 9, 4 • 5, 5, 9 • I don’t know the answer 7. In considering animal and plant sources of protein, which of the following is true? • Animal sources of protein tend to be incomplete be-cause they do not provide all the essential amino acids in adequate amounts to be considered complete pro-teins. • The human body cannot make any amino acids, so we need to get these from protein-rich foods. • In general, animal sources of protein are overall healthier sources of dietary fiber than plant sources of protein. • In many global food traditions, two or more plant sources of protein are combined to enhance the amino acid profile of a dish, incorporating more essential amino acids into the diet. • In general, meat-based diets tend to be lower in satu-rated fat than vegetarian diets. 8. Read the following nutrition label for a flavored yogurt. Based on the label, which of the following interpretations is the most accurate? (used for pre-learning knowledge test as well) 

• The product contains 18 g of sugar from fruit and dairy alone. • Only the added sugars contribute to total caloric in-take, naturally occurring sugars are not included in the calorie counts. • The yogurt contains 10 g of sugar added during man-ufacturing, while the remaining 8 g are intrinsic to in-gredients. • Because total carbohydrate is 22 g and total sugar is 18 g, the other 4 g must be added sugars not disclosed in the label. • I don’t know the answer. 9. Which of the following is the most impacted by batch-cooking and reheating? • Simple sugars. • Unsaturated fats. • Water-soluble vitamins. • Dietary fiber. • I don’t know the answer. 10. Which of the following statements is true? • Eating most of your daily calories at night enhance in-sulin sensitivity. • Timing has no effect on macronutrient metabolism, only total intake matters. • Protein oxidation peaks overnight, making late-night protein optimal. • Carbohydrates consumed in the evening lead to higher glucose or insulin responses than identical morning servings. • I don’t know the answer. 11. Compare and contrast the following two meal plans. What are the potential nutritional trade-offs someone might face when choosing one meal plan over the other? Briefly explain your reasoning. 12. Compare nutrition labels for the following two granola bars. Which one would be suited for hikers? Briefly ex-plain your answer. 13. Consider the lunch meal plan below. What changes will you make to improve its nutritional quality, while keep-ing it enjoyable, satisfying, and budget-friendly? Explain your reasoning. 14. We would like you to create a 3-day meal plan for break-fast based on your learning/preferences. Share a couple sentences describing why you chose each item. 

# Rubric for Open-ended Questions 

## Q11: Comparing two Meal Plans 

In Q11, participants were asked to compare two meal plans, and comment on potential nutritional trade-offs when select-ing one over the other. We followed a binary 0 (correct), 1 (incorrect) rubric, where responses were penalized for pro-viding (1) incorrect reasoning and (2) information irrelevant to the question asked. 

## Q12: Comparing two Nutrition Labels 

As part of Q12, participants were asked to critically eval-uate the nutrition labels of two granola bars and select the one more suitable for hikers. We followed a binary 0 (cor-rect), 1 (incorrect) rubric, where responses were penalized for (1) incorrect interpretation of the nutrition labels and (2) providing incorrect, vague, or generic reasoning. 

## Q13: Improving a Lunch Meal Plan 

In Q13, participants were asked to improve the nutritional quality of a given lunch meal plan, while keeping it en-joyable and budget-friendly. After reviewing participants’ responses, all co-authors finalized the following 1–3 scale rubric for evaluation: 1. Poor: Makes no or minimal adjustments to improve the meal’s nutritional quality. Provides little or no reasoning. Example response: “I would keep it as is.” 2. Good: Suggests one strong change that improves the nu-tritional quality of the meal plan. Reasoning may be brief or limited. May not explicitly consider improve-ments that are enjoyable and budget-friendly. Example response: “I may seek to increase the protein in the meal by adding something like beans, lentils or grilled chicken. These are all simple ingredients that can be pur-chased at a low cost and add nutritional value to this meal.” 3. Excellent: Suggests multiple changes that improve the nutritional quality of the meal plan. Provides clear, well-structured reasoning demonstrating an understand-ing of nutritional trade-offs and explicitly considers both enjoyment and budget-friendliness. Example response: “Brown rice with grilled chicken, more protein. Greens and olive oil would stay, though I would consider adding a different dressing for taste sake. To remove the added sugars, I would get rid of the fruit yogurt, and add plain yogurt, with some honey and maybe some fresh fruit.” 

## Q14: Creating a 3-day Meal Plan 

In Q14, participants were asked to create a 3-day meal plan for breakfast based on their learning. After going through a subset of participants’ responses, and considering exist-ing guidelines on meal planning for healthy eating (Mayo Clinic 2024; USDA 2020) we rated each response on a 1–3 discrete scale (representing low, moderate, and high align-ment), on three dimensions: (1) Personalization; meal plan is customized to personal preferences such as, meal prep time, budget constraints, fitness goals, or dietary restric-tions , (2) Variety; meal plan provides varied recommen-dations for each day , and (3) Balanced, nutrient-dense in-take; meal plan focuses on meeting food group needs with nutrient-dense choices . Finally, ratings across the three di-mensions were averaged to generate the final score. 

# Screening Survey 

1. How often do you use generative AI tools or systems (e.g., ChatGPT, Bing Copilot, Gemini, etc.)? • Never • Occasionally, about a couple of times a month • Sometimes, about a couple of times a week • Often, about once a day • All the time, or many times a day If you are a good fit for the study, we will ask you to learn about “nutrition and meal planning” over the next few days. To help us understand your current knowledge and interest in this topic, please answer the following ques-tions: 2. How would you rate your overall knowledge about nutri-tion and meal planning? • Very poor, I do not know anything about meal planning • Poor, I know very little about nutrition and meal plan-ning • Fair, I know some basics of nutrition and meal plan-ning • Good, I have a decent knowledge of nutrition and meal planning • Excellent, I know a lot about nutrition and meal plan-ning 3. How would you rate your overall interest in nutrition and meal planning or learning about nutrition and meal plan-ning? • Very low, not at all interested • Low, slightly interested • Moderate, somewhat interested • High, very interested • Very high, extremely interested 4. We may ask you to look up information about topics such as weight loss, dieting, or healthy eating. Would you feel comfortable doing so? • Yes • No 5. How often do you engage in learning new things on your own, outside of work or classroom settings (e.g., by look-ing up online, reading books, or following social media)? • Never • Occasionally, about a couple of times a month • Sometimes, about a couple of times a week • Often, about once a day • All the time, or many times a day 6. If you are a good fit, you will be asked to participate in a 10-day long study (excluding weekends). You will be required to complete daily tasks, including writing diary reflections. Would you be willing to participate? • Yes; if selected, I will participate regularly over the 10-day period • No, thanks 

# Onboarding Survey 

## Consent 

1. Would you like to participate in this study, as described in the consent form? • Yes, I would like to participate • No, thanks 2. Do you agree to being audio/video recorded if you are invited to participate in the interview study and choose to accept? • Yes • No 

## Demographic Information 

1. What is your age? • 18-25 • 26-35 • 36-45 • 46-55 • ¿55 • Prefer to not say 2. What is your gender? • Man • Woman • Non-binary • Self-described: • Prefer to not say 3. What is your highest completed level of education? • High school • University or College • Graduate degree • Other: 

## Pre-learning Knowledge Test 

Please answer the following questions based on what you al-ready know about nutrition and meal planning. Answer them with your best knowledge without consulting other people or tools. Incorrect answers will not impact your participation or compensation. 1. When reading a nutrition label, what is the most impor-tant thing to check first? • Serving size • Total calories • Ingredient list • All the above • I don’t know the answer 2. Which of the following describes a practical approach to shopping for groceries? • Choose foods from the perimeter of the grocery store, as items stocked here tend to be less processed than other foods. • Prioritize organic foods (like an organic candy bar) even if they are more highly processed than non-organic foods (like a non-organic bunch of spinach). • Focus on purchasing foods stocked at eye-level on gro-cery store shelves, which are almost always less pro-cessed than other foods. • Choose foods with more ingredients, particularly if they include added vitamins and minerals. • Shopping while hungry tends to increase the purchas-ing of healthier, less processed foods. 3. Read the following nutrition label for a flavored yogurt. Based on the label, which of the following interpretations is the most accurate? • The product contains 18 g of sugar from fruit and dairy alone. • Only the added sugars contribute to total caloric in-take, naturally occurring sugars are not included in the calorie counts. • The yogurt contains 10 g of sugar added during man-ufacturing, while the remaining 8 g are intrinsic to in-gredients. • Because total carbohydrate is 22 g and total sugar is 18 g, the other 4 g must be added sugars not disclosed in the label. • I don’t know the answer. 

## Onboarding for the daily tasks 

The main part of the study consists of 8 days of daily tasks. Each day, starting tomorrow, you will be invited to a new Prolific study. The study will include: • Link to a survey page where you will be introduced to the learning topic for the day and a set of questions for confirming completion of the daily learning task. • After you submit the above survey, you will be redirected to a separate link to submit a diary reflecting on your learning experience and other information-seeking activ-ities you engaged in. 

Learning Goal: 

In this study, you will be asked to learn about nutrition and meal planning. This is a topic that interests many, with the goal of being able to design healthy, nutritious, or budget-friendly meals for oneself or one’s family based on their needs (e.g., to be healthier, lose weight, or build muscles), or even becoming a certified nutritionist or meal planner to work with clients. Each day, we will suggest some sub-topics to help you structure your self-directed learning pro-cess. We hope you find these daily topics interesting, and that the learning is valuable to you beyond the duration of the study. 

Assigned technology: 

To learn about our provided topics your assigned technology is [ChatGPT/Google]. Please follow the steps below to setup this technology: [Instructions for ChatGPT group]: • Use this link to access ChatGPT: https://chatgpt.com/ • You do not need to sign in or create an account. [Instructions for Google group]: • Use this link to access Google: https://www.google.com/ • You do not need to sign in or create an account. • IMPORTANT: Google recently introduced an AI Overview feature that appears on many search result pages. However, in this study, we would like to avoid the impact of AI-generated results. Hence, for the duration of this study, we ask you to add “-ai” to all your search queries when using Google. For example, if you want to look up the definition of nutrition, you may use: “what is nutrition -ai” or “define nutrition -ai”. Take some time to answer the following questions. These will help us confirm that your assigned technology is set up correctly and that you will be able to use it consistently throughout the study duration. • Do you agree to use [ChatGPT/Google] as your primary information-seeking channel throughout the study pe-riod? This means that you will use it to complete the as-signed learning tasks. For your other information needs you are encouraged to go to this technology first, but feel free to use your usual information-seeking channels if needed. 

– Yes, I agree 

– No, thanks • Using the assigned technology, please perform a sim-ple information-seeking task: look up the definition of meal planning. Take a screenshot of [your interaction with ChatGPT/the Google search results page] (with a full screen view to help us see what you did) and upload it here. 

Diary entry practice: 

Since a big part of this study involves writing diary reflec-tions, we would like you to try writing one now. This will give us a chance to review your submission and provide helpful feedback through Prolific messages, if needed. Write a diary entry reflecting on the last time you sought information (e.g., to learn about a topic or to answer ques-tions). Describe your information need (for what topic or question you needed to seek information), how you tried to satisfy this need (e.g., what sources, tools, or strategies you used, and why you chose them), what the outcome was, and how you felt about this information-seeking experience. De-scribe any parts of the information-seeking process that felt unsatisfying or challenging, and how you addressed them.