Title: PERSONAJUDGE: Simulating Individual Human Preference Judgments with Evaluator-Specific Demonstration Data

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.05742v1

Published Time: Wed, 08 Jul 2026 00:28:54 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# PERSONA JUDGE : Simulating Individual Human Preference Judgments with Evaluator-Specific Demonstration Data 

Zeyu He 1* , Xuan Qi 2, Subramanian Chidambaram 2, Zhichao Xu 2,Vinayak Arannil 2, Lydia Chilton 2,3 , Alex C. Williams 2

> 1

Pennsylvania State University, 2AWS AI Fundamental Research, 3Columbia University  

> Correspondence: zeyuhe@psu.edu

Abstract 

Large language models increasingly serve as judges in AI evaluation, but current approaches rely on consensus preferences that ignore indi-vidual evaluator variation. We propose a novel simulation approach that combines categori-cal judgments with evaluator-specific auxiliary data—retrospective reasoning traces and inter-face telemetry—to enable LLM-based simu-lation of individual evaluators via in-context learning. We conduct a systematic empirical study of this approach using multi-facet data from 32 trained annotators across 4,200 pref-erence judgments in a 4 × 4 × 4 factorial de-sign. Our key findings: (1) The simulation approach achieves up to 9.9 percentage point improvements over the Base Judge; (2) Rea-soning traces provide the largest gains with higher collection efforts, while interface teleme-try often hurts rather than helps performance despite being cheaper to collect. (3) Simula-tion difficulty is systematic, predicted by an evaluator’s neutral usage (most clearly on Help-fulness) and divergence from consensus; the neutral-usage tendency—rather than simulata-bility itself—is the cross-task-stable property (r = 0 .728 ). These results establish both the potential and limits of evaluator-specific auxil-iary data for personalized evaluation, offering methodological insights for scaling individual-aware AI assessment. 

1 Introduction 

Large Language Models (LLMs) are increasingly used as judges for model comparison, reward mod-eling, and benchmark construction because they of-fer a scalable alternative to human evaluation (Bai et al., 2022b; Liu et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2023; Lambert et al., 2025). However, most LLM-as-Judge pipelines target an aggregate signal: models are trained, aligned, or evaluated against pooled 

> *Work completed during ZH’s Amazon internship.

Figure 1: PERSONA JUDGE workflow. A human eval-uator first completes judgment tasks, producing three complementary signals: a categorical judgment, inter-face telemetry, and retrospective reasoning. P ERSONA -JUDGE organizes these signals into evaluator-specific demonstrations and combines them with the task instruc-tion and a new task instance. An LLM then uses this information to simulate the target evaluator’s judgment. 

preferences that collapse across annotators (Stien-non et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022a; Zhang et al., 2025), so they simulate crowd-level consensus rather than any specific evaluator. This is a key limitation for open-ended evaluation, where a single shared standard may not exist and annotators apply different criteria to the same out-puts (Van der Lee et al., 2021; Davani et al., 2022). In such settings disagreement is often meaning-ful rather than noise (Basile et al., 2021; Fleisig et al., 2023; Frenda et al., 2025). Even LLM judges that match average ratings can miss group- and person-level differences (Movva et al., 2024). Cur-rent models struggle to infer individual preferences from value-laden statements (Jiang et al., 2025). Matching consensus thus does not guarantee faith-ful simulation of any individual evaluator. This motivates a different target: individual eval-uator simulation, which can support evaluation au-diting, per-person reward modeling, and fairness analysis of whose perspectives evaluation pipelines underrepresent. Prior personalized methods condi-tion on persona descriptions or compact preference arXiv:2607.05742v1 [cs.HC] 7 Jul 2026 profiles (Dong et al., 2024b; Wang et al., 2024a), but represent people through summaries rather than their own decision traces. We instead ask: given an evaluator’s historical judgments and decision traces, can an LLM simulate how that evaluator will judge a new instance? 

We argue that this individual evaluator simula-tion requires richer supervision than final labels alone. A final label captures an outcome, but not the process that produced it. We therefore pro-pose P ERSONA JUDGE (Figure 1), an evaluator-specific framework that uses multi-facet evaluator data: (1) a primary categorical judgment , (2) in-terface telemetry capturing how evaluators inspect the task, and (3) retrospective reasoning giving post-hoc explanations of why decisions were made. Using this framework, we evaluate whether evaluator-specific data can improve simulation over the Base Judge, which complementary signals con-tribute most, and how performance varies across evaluators. We conduct a systematic empirical study with data from 32 trained annotators and 4,200 preference judgments in a factorial design. Extensive experiments show that P ERSONA JUDGE 

improves simulation accuracy over the Base Judge by up to 9.9 points; retrospective reasoning gives the largest gains, while interface telemetry often reduces performance. We also find that simulation difficulty is systematic—predicted by an evalua-tor’s neutral usage and divergence from consensus— with neutral usage a stable cross-task trait. In summary, our contributions are: • We propose a multi-facet simulation framework PERSONA JUDGE for evaluator-specific judgment behavior using categorical judgments, interface telemetry, and retrospective reasoning. • We conduct a systematic empirical analysis of how complementary evaluator-specific signals, model choice, and demonstration count affect the simulation performance. • We characterize evaluator-level simulatability, showing that simulation difficulty varies widely but systematically across evaluators—predicted by their neutral usage and divergence from consensus—and that neutral usage is a stable, cross-task trait. 

2 Related Work 

We review three relevant lines of research: LLM-as-Judge, individualized alignment, and process-oriented behavioral/cognitive traces for modeling human decision behavior. 

Language models as judges LLMs are increas-ingly used as evaluators to simulate human judg-ments. LLM-as-a-Judge methods have shown strong alignment with aggregate human judg-ments, including improved correlations with hu-man ratings and high agreement with human prefer-ences (Liu et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2023) and have rapidly become a standard evaluation paradigm (Gu et al., 2026; Li et al., 2024), but they rely on stan-dardized rubrics that obscure individual variation in judgment styles and criteria application. Stud-ies have highlighted concerns about the biases and robustness in these methods (Wang et al., 2024b; Zheng et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2025; Ye et al., 2024). Moreover, the reproducibility of LLM-based evalu-ation has been questioned because model behavior can drift across updates and evaluation criteria may evolve during the validation process (Chen et al., 2024; Shankar et al., 2024). Traditional crowdsourcing approaches similarly aggregate multiple annotations to improve relia-bility, but such aggregation can obscure meaning-ful differences in annotator judgments and consis-tency (Snow et al., 2008; Williams et al., 2017). Popular preference datasets and pipelines are of-ten formulated around binary pairwise compar-isons (Bai et al., 2022a; Stiennon et al., 2020; Nakano et al., 2021; Ethayarajh et al., 2022), which can make it difficult to represent neutral, uncertain, or mixed judgments that arise in realistic scenarios involving underspecified criteria. 

Individualized alignment Beyond using LLMs as judges during evaluation, a related line of work examines how human preferences are modeled in alignment pipelines. These approaches have im-proved models’ ability to align with human feed-back, but they largely treat preferences as outcome labels and rarely model how individual evaluators arrive at their decisions. Reinforcement Learn-ing from Human Feedback approaches (Bai et al., 2022a; Ouyang et al., 2022) train reward models on aggregated human preference data using techniques like Bradley-Terry modeling (Bradley and Terry, 1952). Later works such as Constitutional AI (Bai et al., 2022b) and RLAIF (Lee et al., 2024) extend this paradigm by incorporating AI feedback, but they aim to learn a single, static preference func-tion. Recent multi-objective and diversity-aware alignment methods model heterogeneous prefer-ences through Pareto trade-offs or mixtures of re-ward models, but they remain formulated at the population level rather than simulating a particular evaluator (Rame et al., 2023; Chakraborty et al., 2024). Persona-based conditioning can be unreli-able, because available persona descriptions can be too sparse or simplistic to predict task-specific preferences (Dong et al., 2024b). Even when users attempt to guide an LLM more directly, they may struggle to translate their implicit standards into explicit labeling instructions: iterative prompt re-finement without gold labels does not reliably im-prove labeling accuracy (He et al., 2025). Other work models or simulates individual responses by conditioning on self-reports—interviews and sur-veys (Park et al., 2026) or persona and demograph-ics (Hu and Collier, 2025)—but relies on elicited descriptions of a person rather than an evalua-tor’s own decision traces for preference judgment. These limitations suggest that evaluator-specific simulation requires richer supervision beyond pref-erence outcomes, including behavioral traces of how evaluators inspect evidence and explanatory traces of how they justify their decisions. 

Behavioral and cognitive traces Prior work on process-oriented supervision points to two signals that may complement outcome-only preference modeling. Behavior-wise, recent work has begun to model people through their interaction traces rather than only their final outputs. For example, Shaikh et al. (2025) collect computer-use observations to build general user models from everyday interactions, showing that behavioral traces can support infer-ence about users’ preferences. Wang et al. (2025)’s OPeRA dataset goes further by collecting browser observations, fine-grained web actions, and self-reported rationales to benchmark personalized hu-man behavior simulation in online shopping. These studies suggest that interaction traces can expose how users gather evidence and act in context, but they focus on user modeling or next-action predic-tion rather than open-ended judgment simulation. Most closely, de Langis et al. (2025) augment pref-erence judgments with annotators’ mouse-tracking reading traces, but analyze the dataset rather than simulating annotators, and use study-time traces rather than deployment telemetry with retrospec-tive reasoning. Cognitive-wise, a separate line of work shows the value of natural language explanations and feed-back for making human reasoning more legible to learning systems. Chain-of-Thought prompting and related evaluation methods show that intermedi-ate reasoning can improve model performance and judgment quality (Wei et al., 2022; Kojima et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023), but they rely on model-generated reasoning rather than human-authored judgment explanations. More broadly, prior work shows that human-provided explanations and feed-back can support model development (Stumpf et al., 2007; Wiegreffe and Marasovi´ c, 2021). However, these efforts are not aimed at simulating how a particular evaluator makes subjective judgments in open-ended comparison settings. Existing work has explored richer evaluator-specific signals, but has not examined whether behavioral and cognitive traces jointly support evaluator-specific judgment simulation. Our work addresses this gap using interface telemetry and retrospective reasoning as complementary supervi-sion. 

3 Simulating Individual Preference Judgments with P ERSONA JUDGE 

We introduce P ERSONA JUDGE , a novel approach for simulating individuals’ preference judgments using LLMs and their ability to perform in-context learning (ICL) (Dong et al., 2024a) with multi-facet, evaluator-specific demonstration data. Unlike consensus-based preference modeling (Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022a), P ERSONA -JUDGE simulates individual evaluators’ decision-making processes by using a primary categorical judgment signal, interface telemetry, and retrospec-tive reasoning. 

3.1 Problem Formulation Setup Given a target evaluator ej and a target evaluation instance x = ( c, r A, r B ), where c is the conversation context and rA, r B are the two candidate responses, P ERSONA JUDGE simulates 

ej ’s three-class judgment y ∈ {A, N, B } (pre-fer A, neutral, prefer B) through in-context learn-ing over evaluator-specific demonstrations. Let 

xi = ( ci, r Ai , r Bi ) denote a prior instance previ-ously judged by ej with label yi,j ∈ { A, N, B }

and an optional explanatory signal si,j (interface telemetry and/or retrospective reasoning). 

Two-round elicitation We elicit the judgment as two binary decisions. A preference-detection step first determines whether ej expresses a preference; a direction step, invoked only when a preference is detected, then determines which option is pre-ferred. Define preference label b(y) = NEUTRAL 

if y = N and b(y) = PREF otherwise, and the di-rection δ(y) = y for y ∈ { A, B }. Both rounds use the same prompt structure—an instruction header, 

k evaluator-specific demonstrations, and the un-labeled query Q( x)—but differ in their round-specific label mapping and sampling constraints: Round 1 maps labels to preference vs. no prefer-ence, whereas Round 2 uses directional preference labels only (Appendix D). 

Round 1 (preference detection) PERSONA -JUDGE constructs the prompt      

> P1(ej, x ) = Intro 1⊕
> kM
> i=1
> Demo  xi, b (yi,j ), s i,j
> ⊕Q( x),

where each demonstration carries the binary label 

b(yi,j ) ∈ { NEUTRAL , PREF }. The model returns 

ˆp ∈ { NEUTRAL , PREF }.

Round 2 (direction) If ˆp = PREF , P ERSONA -JUDGE constructs      

> P2(ej, x ) = Intro 2⊕M
> i:yi,j ̸=N
> Demo  xi, δ (yi,j ), s i,j
> ⊕Q( x),

using demonstrations sampled from the same evaluator-specific pool, restricted to instances in which ej expressed a directional preference, each labeled with its direction δ(yi,j ) ∈ { A, B }. The model returns ˆd ∈ { A, B }.

Composition The simulated judgment recovers the full three-class space, 

ˆy =

(

N if ˆp = NEUTRAL ,

ˆd if ˆp = PREF ,

making the neutral decision explicit while keeping each round a binary choice. In the prompts, the two outcomes of each round are encoded as the rating numbers 1 and 2 (Appendix D). 

3.2 Demonstration Data Model 

PERSONA JUDGE demonstrations combine cate-gorical preference labels {Prefer A, Neutral, Prefer B} with two types of explanatory data: in-terface telemetry and retrospective reasoning .These two signals complement categorical judg-ments in distinct ways: Interface telemetry pro-vides an implicit trace of how evaluators inspect tasks, while retrospective reasoning provides an explicit account of the criteria and trade-offs be-hind their decisions. Unlike binary preference datasets (Stiennon et al., 2020; Bai et al., 2022a), PERSONA JUDGE keeps Neutral as a valid third la-bel instead of collapsing or removing neutral judg-ments. This three-class judgment is the canonical stored demonstration label; round-specific binary labels are derived from it only at prompt construc-tion time. 

3.2.1 Interface Telemetry Data 

Interface telemetry augments categorical judg-ments with implicit behavioral traces of how evalu-ators inspect information during decision making— what was inspected, in what order, for how long, and whether regions were revisited (Jasper and Shapiro, 2002; Franco-Watkins and Johnson, 2011). Process-tracing research shows that decision pro-cesses leave informative behavioral traces (Payne et al., 1993; Ford et al., 1989), and interaction data such as clicks and dwell time can help infer user goals and information access behavior (Guo and Agichtein, 2010; Liu et al., 2010). Incorporating these traces lets P ERSONA JUDGE condition on not only what an evaluator decided, but also how they inspected the task before deciding. 

3.2.2 Retrospective Reasoning Data 

Retrospective verbal reports can complement categorical judgments by providing explicit ac-counts of the evaluator’s decision process (Schulte-Mecklenbeck et al., 2011): a final label alone does not reveal which aspects of the candidate responses an evaluator prioritized, nor why they selected 

Neutral when responses satisfied different crite-ria. Such natural-language explanations can make decision-relevant considerations more explicit in a form language models can directly use (Camburu et al., 2018; Zhou et al., 2020), surfacing evaluator-specific judgment criteria that labels alone do not. Because these reports are collected after task com-pletion, they avoid interfering with the judgment itself (Ericsson and Simon, 1993; van Someren et al., 1994). In our setting, this signal is especially useful for ICL-based simulation because it provides evaluator-specific judgment criteria beyond labels alone. We operationalize this signal as post-task think-aloud transcripts. 

4 Study Design 

We conduct an empirical study to evaluate the ef-fectiveness of P ERSONA JUDGE in simulating in-dividual human judgments to address the research questions (RQs) introduced in Section 5. 

4.1 Evaluation Task Setup 

We sample instances from Anthropic’s Helpful and Harmless (HH) dataset (Bai et al., 2022a), a widely adopted, publicly available preference benchmark whose two distinct evaluation criteria—helpfulness and harmlessness—engage different evaluator rea-soning and enable our cross-task analysis. We select 700 conversations each for the helpfulness and harmlessness evaluation tasks. We recruited 32 trained annotators, 10 of whom contributed to both datasets, resulting in 21 evaluators per dataset. Each evaluator completed 100 judgments per dataset, yielding 2,100 judgments for helpful-ness and 2,100 for harmlessness. We randomize the presentation order and implement position-bias controls by varying the response ordering across evaluators (Wang et al., 2024b; Zheng et al., 2023). 

4.2 Multi-Facet Data Collection 

Since P ERSONA JUDGE simulates individual hu-man judgments by using evaluator-specific, multi-facet demonstrations, we obtain those demonstra-tions through a two-stage annotation workflow de-signed to preserve natural judgments while captur-ing complementary explanatory signals. In Stage 1, evaluators complete preference tasks naturally while GUI interactions are logged automatically. In Stage 2, evaluators review interaction replays and provide think-aloud commentary about their reasoning. Full data collection details are provided in Appendix A. 

Task Interface We implement a browser-based interface with conversational contexts and paired responses. Evaluators select among {Prefer A, Neutral, Prefer B} with neutrality as an equally valid choice. Progressive disclosure reveals infor-mation as evaluators complete milestones, with all interactions automatically timestamped using a structured event taxonomy (See Section A.1). 

Data Post-Processing After multi-facet data col-lection, we transform raw interface interaction logs and retrospective reasoning transcripts into the structured demonstration format used by P ERSON -

> A

JUDGE . For interface telemetry, we convert the collected interaction logs into a standardized event-based representation. Each interaction is serialized as a typed event with a fixed set of fields, creat-ing a compact but expressive description of eval-uator behavior. The full post-processed telemetry scheme used in ICL is provided in Table 4. This representation preserves sequential interaction in-formation while maintaining structural consistency across demonstrations. For retrospective reason-ing, we organize each think-aloud script into an ordered list of section-specific reasoning entries, where each entry contains a reasoning section and its associated content (Figure 6). 

4.3 Experimental Factors 

We employ a 4 × 4 × 4 factorial design in which we generate simulations for three controlled factors: • Demonstration Type : We produce simulations using the four prompt-based configurations made possible by P ERSONA JUDGE : (1) J (judgment-only); (2) J+IT (judgments with interface teleme-try); (3) J+RR (judgments with retrospective rea-soning); and (4) J+IT+RR (judgments with inter-face telemetry and retrospective reasoning data). • Demonstration Count : We conduct simula-tions using a predetermined number of randomly-sampled demonstrations: (1) one demonstration, (2) two demonstrations, (3) four demonstrations, or (4) eight demonstrations. • Simulation Model : We conduct simulations using four performant LLMs: (1) Claude-3.5-Sonnet-V2, (2) Claude-3.7-Sonnet-V1, (3) DeepSeek-R1, and (4) Amazon Nova Premier. 

4.4 Experimental Setup 

For each evaluator within a task, we used a dis-joint split of 100 annotated instances: a 40-item demonstration pool and a 60-item validation set. All reported simulation results are computed on the validation set, while demonstrations are drawn only from the demonstration pool. The evaluation items are never reused as in-context demonstrations. For each human judgment in the validation set, we generated 64 simulated judgments by crossing three experimental factors mentioned in Section 4.3. Each simulated judgment follows the two-round cascade (Algorithm 1, Appendix E): a preference-detection round is run first, and a direction round is run only when the first round predicts a prefer-ence. For each condition, demonstrations for both rounds are sampled from the same target evalua-tor’s 40-item demonstration pool. Round 1 samples 

k demonstrations balanced between Neutral and directional preference labels, while Round 2 sam-ples k demonstrations balanced between Prefer A 

and Prefer B . Exact balancing is not possible in the 1-shot setting. Two helpfulness evaluators with only a few neutral labels are handled as a direction-only special case (Appendix D). We used a single random draw for each evaluator-condition pair and did not repeat the condition across multiple random resamples, so some variance due to demonstration composition may remain unmeasured. For each dataset, we evaluate 21 evaluators, each with 60 validation instances across all simulated settings. This results in 80,640 simulations per dataset and 161,280 simulations in total. 

4.5 Metrics and Baselines 

We report three-class accuracy over {Prefer A, Neutral, Prefer B} by comparing each simu-lated judgment—composed from the two-round cascade—with the corresponding evaluator’s orig-inal human judgment on the same validation in-stance. This metric assesses how accurately the model reproduces an individual evaluator’s ground-truth decisions, rather than agreement with an ag-gregated or consensus label. We preserve the full judgment space instead of collapsing evaluations into binary preferences as in prior works (Bai et al., 2022a; Stiennon et al., 2020). 

Primary baselines We use Random Selection ,which chooses uniformly among the three labels (expected accuracy 1/3). The Base Judge (Model Judgment Baseline) is a zero-shot LLM-as-Judge that produces a judgment with no evaluator-specific demonstrations and no persona, using the same two-round protocol. This baseline isolates the model’s prior, against which the contribution of evaluator-specific demonstrations is measured. 

Controls and reference predictors To interpret 

how PERSONA JUDGE captures individual variation (Section 5.1.3), we use one control and three ref-erence predictors, again scored against each eval-uator’s own labels. (i) The cross-evaluator con-trol holds the model, demonstration type, and shot count fixed but draws demonstrations from non-target evaluators, averaging over all available non-target evaluators of each item, isolating the benefit of evaluator-matched demonstrations from that of demonstrations in general. (ii) The oracle con-sensus baseline predicts, for every evaluator, an item’s majority label among its three human an-notations; it is an “oracle” because it uses held-out human labels the model never observes, and serves as the strongest possible group prior. (iii) The global majority-class baseline always predicts the single most frequent label across the entire task, pooled over all evaluators (e.g., Neutral on Harm-lessness). (iv) The per-evaluator majority-class 

baseline predicts each individual’s own most fre-quent label—the strongest label-frequency predic-tor available per person. 

5 Results and Analysis 

Our empirical study addresses three questions: 

[RQ1] : Can evaluator-specific demonstrations im-prove over the Base Judge when simulating a spe-cific evaluator? 

[RQ2] : How do complementary evaluator-specific signals affect simulation performance, and how do these effects vary with model choice and demon-stration count? 

[RQ3] : How does simulation fidelity vary across evaluators, and which evaluator-level properties explain that variation and transfer across tasks? 

5.1 Main Results 5.1.1 RQ1: Overall Effectiveness 

Figure 2 presents our core results. We compare Random Selection, the Base Judge, and P ERSON -

> A

JUDGE , which conditions on evaluator-specific demonstrations. P ERSONA JUDGE results are aver-aged over the 64 simulation configurations defined by 4 demonstration types, 4 demonstration counts, and 4 models for each dataset. The Base Judge outperforms random selection (0.333 ), reaching 0.452 on Harmlessness and 0.496 

on Helpfulness on average. P ERSONA JUDGE im-proves on these non-personalized judges, reaching 

0.480 on Harmlessness and 0.510 on Helpfulness (+2 .8 and +1 .4 points on average). These averages are deliberately conserva-tive: they pool all 64 model × demonstration-type × shot combinations, including suboptimal combinations. Comparing each combination against its own model’s Base Judge, 43 of 64 com-binations improve on Harmlessness and 50 of 64 

on Helpfulness, and the J+RR family improves in 

14 /16 and 16 /16 combinations, respectively. The combinations that fail to beat their Base Judge are concentrated in the IT conditions ( 16 of the 21 

Harmlessness misses and 9 of the 14 Helpfulness misses involve telemetry), foreshadowing the nega-tive telemetry effect in Section 5.1.2. To verify that these gains reflect personalization rather than demonstrations in general, we com-pare P ERSONA JUDGE against a cross-evaluator Figure 2: Accuracy comparison across random selec-tion, the Base Judge without evaluator-specific demon-strations, and PERSONA JUDGE . Detailed results in Appendix F. 

control that uses demonstrations from a non-target evaluator while holding the demonstration type, model, and shot count fixed. P ERSONA JUDGE out-performs this control by +0 .028 on Harmlessness (0.477 vs. 0.450 , p = 0 .019 ) and +0 .044 on Help-fulness ( 0.515 vs. 0.471 , p < 0.001 ). 1 The advan-tage is positive for most evaluators and becomes strongest with 4–8 demonstrations, suggesting that evaluator-specific examples provide genuine per-sonalization signal rather than merely additional labeled context. 

5.1.2 RQ2: Signal and Factor Patterns 

Table 1 reports marginal average simulation ac-curacy for each experimental factor. Each block isolates one factor while averaging over the other two: Demonstration Type averages over all mod-els and counts, Model averages over all demonstra-tion types and counts, and Demonstration Count 

averages over all models and demonstration types. 

Evaluator-specific signal effects Table 1 shows consistent demonstration-type patterns across both datasets: retrospective reasoning is the most use-ful complementary signal, and interface teleme-try the least. J+RR achieves the highest aver-age accuracy on both tasks ( 0.505 Harmlessness, 

0.537 Helpfulness), whereas J+IT is worst and underperforms judgments alone ( 0.457 , 0.492 ); even combined with reasoning, telemetry pulls 

J+IT+RR below J+RR on both tasks. The                                

> 1The control requires non-target evaluators’ predictions, which exist only for items judged by ≥2evaluators, so both PERSONA JUDGE and the control are evaluated on this matched subset ( 84 .1% of pairs); P ERSONA JUDGE ’s accuracy on it (0.477 /0.515 ) differs from the full-set average in Figure 2 (0.480 /0.510 ). Full significance tests are in Appendix H.
> Factor Harmlessness ( ↑)Helpfulness ( ↑)
> Demonstration Type
> J0.489 0.501 J+IT 0.457 0.492 J+IT+RR 0.469 0.510 J+RR 0.505 0.537
> Judge Model
> Claude 3.5 0.502 0.506 Claude 3.7 0.464 0.517
> DeepSeek-R1 0.482 0.503 Nova Premier 0.471 0.513
> Demonstration Count
> 1-shot 0.444 0.491 2-shot 0.472 0.511 4-shot 0.500 0.519
> 8-shot 0.503 0.519

Table 1: Average simulation accuracy by demonstra-tion type, model, and demonstration count. Each block isolates one factor while averaging over the other two. Bold marks the highest value per task within each block. 

demonstration-type effect is statistically robust (Friedman χ2(3) = 22 .4/20 .0, p < 0.001 ;J+RR > J+IT under Wilcoxon, p ≤ 0.012 , d ≥

0.85 ; Section H). 

Model and demonstration-count effects Both factors matter less than demonstration type. Model choice is weak and task-dependent: the only sig-nificant pair is Claude-3.5-Sonnet > Claude-3.7-Sonnet on Harmlessness ( p = 0 .002 ), with no significant model differences on Helpfulness. Ac-curacy rises with demonstration count but plateaus after 4 shots (Friedman p < 0.05 on both tasks; 1-shot significantly below 4- and 8-shot), so stable simulation is achievable with relatively few demon-strations. 

Best overall configuration Table 2 highlights the strongest condition combinations across tasks. The top settings concentrate in Claude-family models and all use retrospective reasoning (J+RR), rein-forcing the factor-level finding. We recommend a single configuration, Claude-3.5-Sonnet with 8-shot J+RR , which reaches 0.581 on Harmless-ness ( +9 .9 points over its Base Judge) and 0.558 

on Helpfulness ( +5 .8 points). This configura-tion significantly improves over its Base Judge on both tasks (Wilcoxon p = 0.046 and p =0.008 ); the smaller Helpfulness gain is more signif-icant because it is more uniform across evaluators, whereas the larger Harmlessness gain is more vari-able. Claude-3.7-Sonnet with 2-shot J+RR attains marginally higher Helpfulness accuracy ( 0.568 ), but its gain over the Base Judge is not significant Factor Comb. Harmless ( ↑) Helpful ( ↑)

Claude-3.5-Sonnet 

Base Judge 0.482 0.124 0.500 0.104 

J+RR (2-Shot) 0.532 0.103 0.544 0.091 

J+RR (4-Shot) 0.571 0.130 0.548 0.081 

J+RR (8-Shot) 0.581 0.116 0.558 0.068 

Claude-3.7-Sonnet 

Base Judge 0.480 0.140 0.506 0.135 

J+RR (2-Shot) 0.460 0.119 0.568 0.074 

J+RR (4-Shot) 0.494 0.148 0.557 0.082 

J+RR (8-Shot) 0.537 0.131 0.558 0.086 

Table 2: Top configuration performance in simulation accuracy (ACC) with standard-deviation subscript. We report the highest-performing combinations of model, demonstration type, and demonstration count on the Harmlessness and Helpfulness tasks. Bold marks the recommended configuration (Claude-3.5-Sonnet, 8-shot J+RR), which significantly improves over its Base Judge on both tasks ( p = 0 .046 Harmless, p = 0 .008 Helpful). Underline marks the numerically highest Helpfulness value (Claude-3.7-Sonnet, 2-shot J+RR), whose gain over the Base Judge is not significant ( p = 0 .057 ). 

(p = 0 .057 ). 

5.1.3 RQ3: Evaluator-Level Simulatability 

To understand why some evaluators are easier to simulate than others, we analyze per-evaluator ac-curacy and its relationship to task performance and judgment behavior. 

Variation in per-evaluator fidelity Individual simulation accuracy varies widely. Averaged over all configurations, per-evaluator accuracy ranges from 0.375 to 0.565 on Harmlessness and from 

0.386 to 0.655 on Helpfulness, indicating substan-tial evaluator-level variation in simulation fidelity. 

Genuine but modest individual capture Does this variation reflect genuine individual simulation, or just a better group answer? The decisive test is deviation items—where an annotator disagrees with the item’s consensus label ( 20 .2% / 23 .3% of items), so any group- or consensus-based predictor scores 0 by construction. On these, P ERSONA -JUDGE still recovers the annotator’s exact label 

0.367 / 0.360 of the time—accuracy unattainable from group-level information—and its deviations are individual-aligned in both incidence and direc-tion (Appendix I). The captured signal is nonethe-less modest: P ERSONA JUDGE exceeds a global majority-class baseline but not a per-evaluator one (each individual’s own most frequent label; ∆ = 

Figure 3: Evaluators’ Neutral -selection rates are strongly correlated across tasks ( r = 0 .728 , p < 0.05 ), whereas simulation fidelity itself is not ( r = 0 .181 ). Each point is one of the 10 evaluators participating in both tasks; Neutral rates are computed on each evalua-tor’s 60 validation items with a human majority label, so they can differ slightly from the full-data rates in Figure 8. 

−0.019 , p = 0 .95 Harmlessness; ∆ = +0 .042 ,

p = 0 .14 Helpfulness), so it complements rather than replaces simpler per-person predictors. 

Judgment style predicts difficulty Two facets of an evaluator’s judgment style explain who is hard to simulate. First, neutral usage : Neutral is modal in Harmlessness ( 43 .9% ) but rarer in Help-fulness ( 31 .1% , vs. 34 .0% Prefer A / 34 .9% Prefer B), and a higher neutral response rate is associ-ated with lower accuracy—strongly for Helpful-ness ( r = −0.894 ) but only weakly for Harmless-ness ( r = −0.269 ). Second, divergence from con-sensus : an evaluator’s deviation rate—the share of items where their label differs from the majority of the other annotators 2—is a significant negative predictor of accuracy on both tasks ( r = −0.463 ,

p = 0 .034 Harmlessness; r = −0.676 , p < 0.001 

Helpfulness), and the negative association persists after partialling out neutral usage (Harmlessness 

r = −0.576 , p < 0.01 ; Helpfulness r = −0.427 ,

p = 0 .06 ). Idiosyncratic disagreement therefore adds difficulty beyond neutrality: evaluators with clear, consensus-aligned preferences are easier to simulate than those who abstain or diverge. 

A stable trait with a task-dependent effect For the 10 evaluators who completed both tasks, simu-lation fidelity itself does not transfer across tasks 

> 2Leave-one-out, so an evaluator never contributes to the consensus they are scored against; an all-rater consensus yields the same negative direction but weaker estimates.

(r = 0 .181 , p = 0 .616 ). What transfers is the evaluator’s neutral-usage tendency : their Neutral -selection rate is strongly correlated across the two tasks ( r = 0 .728 , p < 0.05 ; Figure 3). Neutral us-age is a stable, trait-like property of an evaluator— but because its effect on difficulty is task-dependent (strong for Helpfulness, weak for Harmlessness, above), this stable trait does not make simulata-bility itself stable across tasks. We interpret this cautiously given the limited overlap set ( n = 10 ). 

5.2 Discussion Why does retrospective reasoning help more than interface telemetry? Retrospective reason-ing likely helps because it externalizes the internal logic of a decision—how evaluators interpret con-text, weigh trade-offs, and justify uncertainty—in a text form LLMs can readily use, aligning the model with not only what was judged but why . In-terface telemetry, by contrast, captures procedural behavior (clicks, reveals, dwell time) whose link to evaluative intent is indirect and varies across eval-uators and tasks, making it a noisier conditioning signal. We therefore interpret this result as specific to our event-level telemetry encoding; higher-level behavioral summaries, such as dwell-time aggre-gates or re-read counts, may provide different or stronger signals. 

Uneven but systematic simulatability Because simulation difficulty tracks evaluator judgment style rather than noise (Section 5.1.3), it is unlikely to close with more of the same signals: current methods reproduce decisive, consensus-aligned styles more readily than uncertain or idiosyncratic ones, and the individual signal they capture, though genuine, does not yet exceed a person’s own la-bel tendency. Better representing ambiguity and idiosyncratic disagreement is therefore a key direc-tion for future work. 

Implications for evaluator-specific simulation 

These findings suggest that evaluator-specific sim-ulation can complement consensus toward model-ing meaningful individual variation. Disagreement, neutrality, and diversity should not be treated as noise, but as part of the target behavior that simula-tion methods must capture. Practically, complementary signals show a clear cost–benefit asymmetry: retrospective reasoning is more costly to collect than interface telemetry— roughly five times more time per item—but con-tributes substantially more to simulation fidelity and interpretability (per-stage annotation times in Section B). Reasoning collection is therefore jus-tified where fidelity matters most (e.g., safety or fairness auditing), whereas raw telemetry alone is unlikely to suffice for routine large-scale pipelines; how to scale per-evaluator reasoning collection to large annotator pools remains an open challenge. 

6 Conclusion and Future Work 

We introduce PERSONA JUDGE , an evaluator-specific simulation framework. P ERSONA JUDGE 

models evaluator-specific judgments by combining categorical preferences, retrospective reasoning, and interface telemetry through in-context learn-ing. Complementing the Base Judge, our results show that individual-level simulation is both fea-sible and meaningful: evaluator-specific demon-strations improve over non-personalized judges, retrospective reasoning provides the strongest ben-efit, and interface telemetry can even reduce per-formance despite its lower collection cost. We also find that simulation difficulty is systematic—driven by evaluators’ neutral usage and divergence from consensus—with neutral usage a stable cross-task trait; the individual signal captured is genuine but modest, complementing simpler per-person predic-tors. These findings suggest that the next step is not simply collecting more signals, but improving how we capture evaluator intent: extracting more value from low-cost telemetry and collecting richer rea-soning with less user burden. More broadly, P ER -

> SONA

JUDGE illustrates a shift in LLM-as-Judge from producing pooled labels to simulating how individuals evaluate, supporting systems that are both scalable and faithful to the inherent diver-sity in human judgment. Beyond evaluation, such individually grounded simulations could provide fine-grained per-evaluator preference signals for reward modeling under heterogeneous human pref-erences (Rame et al., 2023; Chakraborty et al., 2024), complementing synthetic-persona datasets constructed from aggregate demographic distribu-tions (Meyer and Corneil, 2025; Riaz et al., 2025; Cisar et al., 2025; Arannil et al., 2023). Future work can extend this line by broadening beyond pairwise HH-style judgments, scaling to more di-verse evaluator populations, and integrating adap-tive memory or fine-tuning strategies tailored to richer behavioral traces. Limitations 

In this work, we focus on pairwise preference judg-ments over conversational follow-up responses in the Helpful and Harmless setting. This scope pro-vides a controlled and practically important testbed for evaluator-specific simulation, but we have not yet tested generalization to other evaluation for-mats, domains, or modalities. Further, our dataset includes 32 trained annotators and 4,200 total judg-ments. This is substantial for a process-rich col-lection protocol, but broader population coverage remains a next step; expanding evaluator diver-sity was beyond the bandwidth of this study be-cause each instance required collecting both out-come labels and richer auxiliary traces. PER -

> SONA

JUDGE uses in-context learning with sam-pled demonstrations as a strong and transparent baseline. Alternative approaches—including fine-tuning, retrieval-based memory, or sequence-aware architectures for interaction traces—are promis-ing directions that we leave for future work due to scope constraints. Our study also omits two measurements that would benefit future work: a delayed test–retest of evaluators, which would give an empirical ceiling on simulation accuracy, and a formal workload survey (e.g., NASA-TLX) to quantify annotator fatigue. Retrospective reason-ing, although cued by replaying each evaluator’s own interaction rather than recalled from memory alone, remains a post-hoc account and may par-tially rationalize rather than transcribe the original decision process. Finally, neutral judgments likely reflect multiple underlying decision processes that are not explicitly disentangled in the current frame-work. Developing ambiguity-aware modeling for non-commitment and balanced evaluation is there-fore an actionable next direction. 

Ethical Considerations 

Our prompt is released for reproducibility, but P ER -

> SONA

JUDGE may be potentially misused when treated as a replacement for real human evalua-tors. Because uncertainty and borderline cases re-main challenging for P ERSONA JUDGE to simulate reliably, overreliance on P ERSONA JUDGE could misrepresent edge cases and bias downstream deci-sions. Further, the collection and use of reasoning traces and interface telemetry introduce privacy considerations. These limitations indicate that any practical deployment should be accompanied by transparency, consent, and human oversight. 

References 

Vinayak Arannil, Tomal Deb, and Atanu Roy. 2023. ADEQA: A question answer based approach for joint ADE-suspect extraction using sequence-to-sequence transformers. In Proceedings of the 22nd Work-shop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing and BioNLP Shared Tasks , pages 206–214, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Saurav Kadavath, Jackson Kernion, Tom Conerly, Sheer El-Showk, Nelson Elhage, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Tristan Hume, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Liane Lovitt, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, Ben Mann, and Jared Kaplan. 2022a. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862 .Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones, Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, Carol Chen, Catherine Olsson, Christo-pher Olah, Danny Hernandez, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Dustin Li, Eli Tran-Johnson, Ethan Perez, Jamie Kerr, Jared Mueller, Jeffrey Ladish, Joshua Landau, Kamal Ndousse, Kamile Lukosuite, Liane Lovitt, Michael Sellitto, Nelson Elhage, Nicholas Schiefer, Noemi Mercado, Nova DasSarma, Robert Lasenby, Robin Larson, Sam Ringer, Scott John-ston, Shauna Kravec, Sheer El Showk, Stanislav Fort, Tamera Lanham, Timothy Telleen-Lawton, Tom Conerly, Tom Henighan, Tristan Hume, Samuel R. Bowman, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Ben Mann, Dario Amodei, Nicholas Joseph, Sam McCandlish, Tom Brown, and Jared Kaplan. 2022b. Constitutional AI: Harmlessness from AI feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073 .Valerio Basile, Michael Fell, Tommaso Fornaciari, Dirk Hovy, Silviu Paun, Barbara Plank, Massimo Poesio, and Alexandra Uma. 2021. We need to consider disagreement in evaluation. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Benchmarking: Past, Present and Future , pages 15–21, Online. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E Terry. 1952. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. The method of paired comparisons. Biometrika , 39(3/4):324– 345. Oana-Maria Camburu, Tim Rocktäschel, Thomas Lukasiewicz, and Phil Blunsom. 2018. e-SNLI: Nat-ural language inference with natural language expla-nations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 31. Souradip Chakraborty, Jiahao Qiu, Hui Yuan, Alec Kop-pel, Dinesh Manocha, Furong Huang, Amrit Bedi, and Mengdi Wang. 2024. MaxMin-RLHF: Align-ment with diverse human preferences. In Proceed-ings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 6116–6135. PMLR. Lingjiao Chen, Matei Zaharia, and James Zou. 2024. How is ChatGPT’s behavior changing over time? 

Harvard Data Science Review , 6(2). Caitlin Cisar, Emily Sheffield, Joshua Drake, Alden Harrell, Subramanian Chidambaram, Nikita Nan-gia, Vinayak Arannil, and Alex Williams. 2025. PI-LOT: Steering synthetic data generation with psy-chological & linguistic output targeting. Preprint ,arXiv:2509.15447. Aida Mostafazadeh Davani, Mark Díaz, and Vinodku-mar Prabhakaran. 2022. Dealing with disagreements: Looking beyond the majority vote in subjective an-notations. Transactions of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics , 10:92–110. Karin de Langis, William Walker, Khanh Chi Le, and Dongyeop Kang. 2025. Tracing how annotators think: Augmenting preference judgments with read-ing processes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.21912 .Qingxiu Dong, Lei Li, Damai Dai, Ce Zheng, Jingyuan Ma, Rui Li, Heming Xia, Jingjing Xu, Zhiyong Wu, Baobao Chang, Xu Sun, Lei Li, and Zhifang Sui. 2024a. A survey on in-context learning. In Proceed-ings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 1107–1128, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yijiang River Dong, Tiancheng Hu, and Nigel Collier. 2024b. Can LLM be a personalized judge? In Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 10126–10141, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. K. Anders Ericsson and Herbert A. Simon. 1993. Pro-tocol Analysis: Verbal Reports as Data . MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. Kawin Ethayarajh, Yejin Choi, and Swabha Swayamdipta. 2022. Understanding dataset difficulty with V-usable information. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 5988–6008. PMLR. Eve Fleisig, Rediet Abebe, and Dan Klein. 2023. When the majority is wrong: Modeling annotator disagree-ment for subjective tasks. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing , pages 6715–6726. J. Kevin Ford, Neal Schmitt, Susan L. Schechtman, Brian M. Hults, and Mary L. Doherty. 1989. Process tracing methods: Contributions, problems, and ne-glected research questions. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 43(1):75–117. Ana M Franco-Watkins and Joseph G Johnson. 2011. Applying the decision moving window to risky choice: Comparison of eye-tracking and mouse-tracing methods. Judgment and Decision making ,6(8):740–749. Simona Frenda, Gavin Abercrombie, Valerio Basile, Alessandro Pedrani, Raffaella Panizzon, Alessan-dra Teresa Cignarella, Cristina Marco, and Davide Bernardi. 2025. Perspectivist approaches to natural language processing: a survey. Language Resources and Evaluation , 59(2):1719–1746. Jiawei Gu, Xuhui Jiang, Zhichao Shi, Hexiang Tan, Xuehao Zhai, Chengjin Xu, Wei Li, Yinghan Shen, Shengjie Ma, Honghao Liu, and 1 others. 2026. A survey on LLM-as-a-judge. The Innovation , 7(6). Qi Guo and Eugene Agichtein. 2010. Ready to buy or just browsing? detecting web searcher goals from interaction data. In Proceedings of the 33rd Inter-national ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval , pages 130– 137. Zeyu He, Saniya Naphade, and Ting-Hao Kenneth Huang. 2025. Prompting in the dark: Assessing human performance in prompt engineering for data labeling when gold labels are absent. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’25, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Tiancheng Hu and Nigel Collier. 2025. iNews: A mul-timodal dataset for modeling personalized affective responses to news. In Proceedings of the 63rd An-nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 25000– 25040. JD Jasper and Jennifer Shapiro. 2002. MouseTrace: A better mousetrap for catching decision processes. 

Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Comput-ers , 34(3):364–374. Liwei Jiang, Taylor Sorensen, Sydney Levine, and Yejin Choi. 2025. Can language models reason about in-dividualistic human values and preferences? In Pro-ceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 6757–6794, Vienna, Austria. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yu-taka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. 2022. Large lan-guage models are zero-shot reasoners. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:22199– 22213. Nathan Lambert, Valentina Pyatkin, Jacob Morrison, LJ Miranda, Bill Yuchen Lin, Khyathi Chandu, Nouha Dziri, Sachin Kumar, Tom Zick, Yejin Choi, Noah A. Smith, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2025. Re-wardBench: Evaluating reward models for language modeling. In Findings of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics: NAACL 2025 , pages 1755–1797, Albuquerque, New Mexico. Association for Compu-tational Linguistics. Harrison Lee, Samrat Phatale, Hassan Mansoor, Thomas Mesnard, Johan Ferret, Kellie Lu, Colton Bishop, Ethan Hall, Victor Carbune, Abhinav Rastogi, and Sushant Prakash. 2024. RLAIF vs. RLHF: scaling reinforcement learning from human feedback with ai feedback. In Proceedings of the 41st Interna-tional Conference on Machine Learning , ICML’24. JMLR.org. Haitao Li, Qian Dong, Junjie Chen, Huixue Su, Yu-jia Zhou, Qingyao Ai, Ziyi Ye, and Yiqun Liu. 2024. LLMs-as-judges: a comprehensive survey on LLM-based evaluation methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.05579 .Chao Liu, Ryen W. White, and Susan Dumais. 2010. Understanding web browsing behaviors through weibull analysis of dwell time. In Proceedings of the 33rd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval ,pages 379–386. Yang Liu, Dan Iter, Yichong Xu, Shuohang Wang, Ruochen Xu, and Chenguang Zhu. 2023. G-eval: NLG evaluation using gpt-4 with better human align-ment. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 2511–2522, Singapore. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Yev Meyer and Dane Corneil. 2025. Nemotron-Personas-USA: Synthetic personas aligned to real-world distributions. Rajiv Movva, Pang Wei Koh, and Emma Pierson. 2024. Annotation alignment: Comparing LLM and human annotations of conversational safety. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 9048–9062. Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Ouyang Long, Christina Kim, Christopher Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, Xu Jiang, Karl Cobbe, Tyna Eloundou, Gretchen Krueger, Kevin Button, Matthew Knight, Benjamin Chess, and John Schulman. 2021. We-bGPT: Browser-assisted question-answering with hu-man feedback. ArXiv , abs/2112.09332. Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Car-roll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul F. Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. 2022. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 35. Curran Associates, Inc. Joon Sung Park, Carolyn Q Zou, Jonne Kamphorst, Niles Egan, Aaron Shaw, Benjamin Mako Hill, Carrie Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, Robb Willer, and 1 others. 2026. LLM agents grounded in self-reports enable general-purpose simulation of individuals. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.10109 .John W. Payne, James R. Bettman, and Eric J. Johnson. 1993. The Adaptive Decision Maker . Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Alexandre Rame, Guillaume Couairon, Corentin Dancette, Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Mustafa Shukor, Laure Soulier, and Matthieu Cord. 2023. Rewarded soups: towards Pareto-optimal alignment by inter-polating weights fine-tuned on diverse rewards. Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,36:71095–71134. Haris Riaz, Sourav Sanjukta Bhabesh, Vinayak Aran-nil, Miguel Ballesteros, and Graham Horwood. 2025. MetaSynth: Meta-prompting-driven agentic scaffolds for diverse synthetic data generation. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 18770–18803, Vienna, Austria. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. Michael Schulte-Mecklenbeck, Anton Kühberger, and Rob Ranyard. 2011. The role of process data in the development and testing of process models of judg-ment and decision making. Judgment and Decision making , 6(8):733–739. Omar Shaikh, Shardul Sapkota, Shan Rizvi, Eric Horvitz, Joon Sung Park, Diyi Yang, and Michael S Bernstein. 2025. Creating general user models from computer use. In Proceedings of the 38th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology , pages 1–23. Shreya Shankar, JD Zamfirescu-Pereira, Björn Hart-mann, Aditya Parameswaran, and Ian Arawjo. 2024. Who validates the validators? Aligning LLM-assisted evaluation of LLM outputs with human preferences. In Proceedings of the 37th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology , pages 1–14. Lin Shi, Chiyu Ma, Wenhua Liang, Xingjian Diao, We-icheng Ma, and Soroush Vosoughi. 2025. Judging the judges: A systematic study of position bias in LLM-as-a-judge. In Proceedings of the 14th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing and the 4th Conference of the Asia-Pacific Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 292–314. Rion Snow, Brendan O’Connor, Dan Jurafsky, and An-drew Y Ng. 2008. Cheap and fast–but is it good? evaluating non-expert annotations for natural lan-guage tasks. In Proceedings of the 2008 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing ,pages 254–263. Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. 2020. Learn-ing to summarize with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:3008– 3021. Simone Stumpf, Vidya Rajaram, Lida Li, Margaret Burnett, Thomas Dietterich, Erin Sullivan, Russell Drummond, and Jonathan Herlocker. 2007. Toward harnessing user feedback for machine learning. In 

Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces , pages 82–91. Chris Van der Lee, Albert Gatt, Emiel Van Miltenburg, and Emiel Krahmer. 2021. Human evaluation of automatically generated text: Current trends and best practice guidelines. Computer Speech & Language ,67:101151. Maarten van Someren, Yvonne Barnard, and Jacobijn Sandberg. 1994. The think aloud method: a practical approach to modelling cognitive processes. Knowl-edge Based Systems .Danqing Wang, Kevin Yang, Hanlin Zhu, Xiaomeng Yang, Andrew Cohen, Lei Li, and Yuandong Tian. 2024a. Learning personalized alignment for evalu-ating open-ended text generation. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 13274–13292, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Peiyi Wang, Lei Li, Liang Chen, Zefan Cai, Dawei Zhu, Binghuai Lin, Yunbo Cao, Lingpeng Kong, Qi Liu, Tianyu Liu, and Zhifang Sui. 2024b. Large lan-guage models are not fair evaluators. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 9440–9450, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Ziyi Wang, Yuxuan Lu, Wenbo Li, Amirali Amini, Bo Sun, Yakov Bart, Weimin Lyu, Jiri Gesi, Tian Wang, Jing Huang, Yu Su, Upol Ehsan, Malihe Alikhani, Toby Jia-Jun Li, Lydia Chilton, and Dakuo Wang. 2025. OPeRA: A dataset of observation, per-sona, rationale, and action for evaluating llms on hu-man online shopping behavior simulation. Preprint ,arXiv:2506.05606. Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V. Le, and Denny Zhou. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompt-ing elicits reasoning in large language models. In 

Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’22, Red Hook, NY, USA. Curran Associates Inc. Sarah Wiegreffe and Ana Marasovi´ c. 2021. Teach me to explain: A review of datasets for explainable natural language processing. In Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems Track on Datasets and Benchmarks .Alex Williams, Joslin Goh, Charlie Willis, Aaron Elli-son, James Brusuelas, Charles Davis, and Edith Law. 2017. Deja vu: Characterizing worker reliability using task consistency. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Human Computation and Crowdsourc-ing , volume 5, pages 197–205. Jiayi Ye, Yanbo Wang, Yue Huang, Dongping Chen, Qihui Zhang, Nuno Moniz, Tian Gao, Werner Geyer, Chao Huang, Pin-Yu Chen, Nitesh V Chawla, and Xiangliang Zhang. 2024. Justice or prejudice? quan-tifying biases in LLM-as-a-judge. In NeurIPS Safe Generative AI Workshop 2024 .Michael Jq Zhang, Zhilin Wang, Jena D. Hwang, Yi Dong, Olivier Delalleau, Yejin Choi, Eunsol Choi, Xiang Ren, and Valentina Pyatkin. 2025. Diverging preferences: When do annotators disagree and do models know? In Proceedings of the 42nd Interna-tional Conference on Machine Learning , volume 267 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 76193–76212. PMLR. Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Judging LLM-as-a-judge with MT-Bench and Chatbot Arena. 

Advances in neural information processing systems ,36:46595–46623. Wangchunshu Zhou, Jinyi Hu, Hanlin Zhang, Xiao-dan Liang, Maosong Sun, Chenyan Xiong, and Jian Tang. 2020. Towards interpretable natural language understanding with explanations as latent variables. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,33:6803–6814. 

A Data Collection 

A.1 User Interface Implementation Details 

We implement P ERSONA JUDGE data collection system as a managed AWS service. The system includes a lightweight browser-based front end that standardizes task presentation and logs inter-face telemetry, and a back end that stores multi-facet evaluation traces—including categorical judg-ments, interaction logs, and retrospective reasoning data—in a structured format for downstream analy-sis. 

Stage 1 Interface (Figure 4) The Stage 1 in-terface is designed for preference evaluation. It presents the conversation context in the left panel, two candidate AI-generated responses in the upper-right panel, and a three-point judgment scale in the lower-right panel for selecting the more help-ful/harmless response or indicating a tie. Evalua-tors complete the task in this interface while inter-action traces are logged automatically. 

Stage 2 Interface (Figure 5) The Stage 2 in-terface is designed for retrospective think-aloud collection. It presents a replay of the evaluator’s earlier interaction trace in the main panel, together with playback controls for reviewing the session. Figure 4: Stage 1 interface for preference judgment collection, showing the conversation context, two AI responses, and a three-point judgment scale. 

A side panel contains structured input sections for explaining conversation understanding, response evaluation, and final judgment selection, enabling evaluators to provide reasoning while revisiting their prior actions. 

A.2 Dataset Selection and Assignment 

For our study, we randomly selected 700 unique (i.e., distinct dialogue threads without shared con-versation history) conversations from each dataset, limiting conversation length to 3-5 turns. This ap-proach ensured that participants could adequately comprehend the conversational context while pre-venting excessive cognitive load. All responses are randomly shuffled to prevent order bias in par-ticipant evaluations. We implemented additional quality control measures by filtering out empty re-sponses and ensuring that at least 60% of words in each response appeared in the Google common English word list. 3

For each dataset, all 700 conversations were an-notated by three different evaluators to improve label reliability. To manage the workflow effi-ciently, we partitioned the 700 conversations into 70 batches of 10 conversations each. These 70 batches were randomly and evenly assigned to 21 evaluators, with each batch completed indepen-dently by three evaluators. To reduce potential or-der effects, the presentation order of conversations 

> 3https://github.com/first20hours/ google-10000-english/tree/master

within each batch was randomly shuffled before evaluators began the task. 

A.3 User Study Procedure 

The user study procedure consisted of onboard-ing and tutorial training, followed by a two-stage annotation workflow. Our 32 evaluators were pro-fessional data annotators from an in-house data annotation team at our institution, with prior anno-tation experience; they were not anonymous crowd-sourcing workers. Evaluators accessed the system through a web link and logged in using their as-signed credentials. All judgments were completed remotely on the evaluators’ own laptops. 

Onboarding Evaluators were first introduced to the study goals, task procedures, and data handling practices. Informed consent was obtained prior to participation. Evaluators were told that partic-ipation was voluntary, that they could withdraw at any time without penalty, and that their audio recordings would be stored confidentially. 

Tutorial and training Evaluators were then in-troduced to the system workflow through either a live Zoom onboarding session or a recorded tutorial video, depending on when they joined the study. After this introduction, they were presented with 10 tutorial items designed to familiarize them with the interface, task format, and retrospective reason-ing procedure. These tutorial items were reviewed to ensure that evaluators understood the workflow Figure 5: Stage 2 interface for retrospective reasoning, showing an interaction replay and structured think-aloud input fields. 

before beginning the main annotation tasks. 

Main annotation tasks Each evaluator com-pleted 100 assigned evaluation instances, organized into 10 batches. Because providing retrospective reasoning imposed substantial mental effort, eval-uators were allowed to pause after any batch and resume later at their convenience. They were also encouraged to ask questions at any point during the annotation process. 

B Annotation Time 

We quantify the per-item annotation effort of each collection stage from the interaction logs ( n =2,100 tasks per dataset; 21 evaluators × 100 items). 

Stage 1 time (categorical judgment with interface telemetry, collected together) is measured from the interface telemetry as hands-on time—from the start of an item to its final rating_selected 

event—with idle pauses longer than 30 s removed so the figure reflects active engagement rather than breaks. Stage 2 time (retrospective think-aloud) is the duration of each evaluator’s reasoning sections (conversation understanding, response evaluation, and judgment). Table 3 reports the figures. Collecting a categor-ical judgment takes under a minute per item ( ∼56– 57 s), and interface telemetry adds no marginal cost because it is logged passively during Stage 1.                         

> Stage Harmlessness Helpfulness Stage 1: judgment +telemetry 56 .2s57 .4s(median) 48 .0s47 .0sStage 2: retrospective reasoning 308 .5s275 .3s(median) 280 .6s209 .8sTotal per item (mean) 364 .7s332 .7s

Table 3: Mean (and median) per-item annotation time by stage, in seconds, over the 2,100 tasks per dataset. Stage-1 time is idle-adjusted active engagement; Stage-2 time is the think-aloud recording duration. 

In contrast, retrospective reasoning is roughly five times more expensive to collect ( ∼4.6–5.1 min per item in Stage 2), bringing the total to about 6 min per item. This cost asymmetry underlies the practi-cal trade-off discussed in §5.2: the most informa-tive signal (retrospective reasoning) is also by far the most expensive to collect, whereas the cheapest signal (telemetry) contributes least to simulation fidelity. 

C Demonstration Format 

Processed Interface Telemetry Table 4 presents the structured interface telemetry schema used in PERSONA JUDGE demonstrations. 

Formatted Retrospective Reasoning Figure 6 presents the formatted retrospective reasoning used in the P ERSONA JUDGE demonstration. Table 4: Structured interface telemetry schema used in PersonaJudge demonstrations. Each interaction trace is serialized as a sequence of typed events with event-specific fields.                                                                                                                               

> Event Type Field 1 Field 2 Field 3 Field 4 Field 5 Field 6 Field 7
> mouse_move coord_from coord_to timestamp ui_section ———
> left_click coordinate timestamp ui_section element_type text ——
> double_click coordinate timestamp ui_section element_type selected_text ——
> triple_click coordinate timestamp ui_section element_type selected_text ——
> right_click coordinate timestamp ui_section element_type text ——
> middle_click coordinate timestamp ui_section element_type text ——
> scroll timestamp scroll_dir scroll_amt scroll_cnt scroll_height client_h scroll_pct wait timestamp duration —————
> content_revealed timestamp ——————
> rating_selected coordinate timestamp rating_value ————
> drag_start coord_from coord_to timestamp ui_section text ——
> left_click_drag coord_from coord_to timestamp ui_section selected_text ——
> text_selection sel_bounds timestamp ui_section selected_text ———
> key timestamp text key_code modifiers key_sequence ——
> key_release timestamp text key_code held_duration ———
> hold_key timestamp text key_code duration held_duration ——
> type timestamp text value_length ————

[{" think_aloud_section ": "understanding ", " think_aloud_content ": "..." }, {" think_aloud_section ": " evaluating ", " think_aloud_content ": "..." }, {" think_aloud_section ": " judgment ", " think_aloud_content ": "..." }]

Figure 6: Retrospective Reasoning Format 

ICL Demonstration Format Figure 7 presents the overall structure of a P ERSONA JUDGE demon-stration. 

ICL Demonstration Format 

<demonstration> <conversation> ... </conversation> <response_options> <response_a>...</response_a> <response_b>...</response_b> </response_options> <judgment>...</judgment> <ui_activity>...</ui_activity> <!-- optional --> <think_aloud>...</think_aloud> <!-- optional --> </demonstration> 

Figure 7: Canonical structure of a P ERSONA JUDGE 

demonstration before round-specific relabeling. The stored demonstration contains the evaluation instance, the evaluator’s original three-class judgment, and op-tional complementary data. At prompt construction time, the judgment field is converted to the binary label space required by each cascade round. 

D Simulation Prompt 

We generate each simulated judgment through a two-round procedure that decomposes the three-class judgment into two binary decisions. In the 

first round , the model decides whether the evalua-tor expresses a preference at all ( preference vs. no preference / neutral ). In the second round , invoked only when the first round indicates a preference, the model decides the direction ( prefer Option A 

vs. prefer Option B ). The two outputs are com-posed into the final three-class label {Prefer A, Neutral, Prefer B} : a first-round “no prefer-ence” yields Neutral , otherwise the second-round direction determines Prefer A or Prefer B .Demonstrations are converted to match each round. For the first-round prompt, each demon-stration’s label is mapped to a binary preference indicator: a neutral judgment becomes “no prefer-ence” (1) and any directional judgment (prefer A or prefer B) becomes “has a preference” (2). For the second-round prompt, only demonstrations in which the evaluator expressed a preference are retained, each labeled with its direction: prefer Option A (1) or prefer Option B (2). 

Direction-only special case. For two helpfulness evaluators whose labels contain a few Neutral 

instances (evaluators 1 and 9), the preference-detection step is degenerate. For these evalua-tors, simulation proceeds directly with the direction round, and the composed labels are therefore re-stricted to Prefer A or Prefer B .We use a single shared template for both rounds and both tasks; only the Judgment Scale block changes with the round and task, as shown below. Each instantiated prompt includes only the scale block for its task and round; the alternatives are shown together here for compactness. 

Simulation Prompt Template 

> You are a simulation agent specifically trained to replicate the judgment preferences in a preference judgment task involving model-generated responses. Your core function is to analyze pairs of responses and provide a judgment that aligns to the individual’s provided demonstrations, rather than making a judgment based on your own biases, preferences, and tendencies. Your task is to: 1. Carefully study the example judgments provided in the <examples> tags 2. Identify the rating patterns and preference criteria shown in these examples 3. Apply the same judgment framework to rate new response pairs 4. Output your rating in a way that maintains consistency with the example patterns Judgment Scale: [Round 1 -- Preference Detection] [For Helpfulness Dataset] 1 = No preference (Options A and B are equally helpful)
> 2 = Has a preference on which option is more helpful [For Harmlessness Dataset] 1 = No preference (Options A and B are equally harmless) 2 = Has a preference on which option is more harmless [Round 2 -- Preference Direction; used only when Round 1 = has a preference] [For Helpfulness Dataset] 1 = Prefer Option A as more helpful 2 = Prefer Option B as more helpful [For Harmlessness Dataset] 1 = Prefer Option A as more harmless 2 = Prefer Option B as more harmless Important: Your role is to simulate an individual’s judgment patterns based on the provided demonstrations. You should not make independent assessments based on your own criteria. Your success is measured by how well your ratings match the patterns in the provided demonstrations.
> Individual’s Examples: <examples> <demonstration_1> ... </examples> Current Task: <current_task> Provide your simulated judgment in the format: <judgment>X</judgment> where X is the rating number (1 or 2).

E Simulation Procedure 

Algorithm 1 summarizes the P ERSONA JUDGE two-round simulation for one query; the study runs it for every validation item under each model × demonstration-type × shot condition (§4.4). Each demonstration carries the evaluator’s stored label and, depending on the condition, its interface telemetry and/or retrospective reasoning. 

F Simulation Detailed Evaluator-Level Results 

Tables 5 and 6 report evaluator-level simulation accuracy for the harmlessness and helpfulness datasets, respectively. All accuracies are computed by comparing simulated judgments against the cor-responding ground-truth judgments of the same evaluator on the validation set. Algorithm 1 PERSONA JUDGE two-round simula-tion of evaluator ej on query x = ( c, r A, r B ).                                                                

> Require: demonstration pool Dj={(xi, y i,j , s i,j )}; shot count k; judge model M
> 1: D1←sample kdemos from Dj, balanced over b(yi,j )∈{NEUTRAL ,PREF }
> 2: ˆp←M P1(ej, x )▷Round 1: preference detection with D1, labels b(yi,j )
> 3: if ˆp=NEUTRAL then return ˆy←N
> 4: end if
> 5: D2←sample kdemos from {i:yi,j ̸=N}, balanced over δ(yi,j )∈ { A, B }
> 6: ˆd←M P2(ej, x )▷Round 2: direction with D2,labels δ(yi,j )
> 7: return ˆy←ˆd

The Model Judgment Baseline columns report zero-shot LLM-as-Judge baselines (no demonstra-tions). These prompts include only the task in-struction and the query instance. All remaining columns report P ERSONA JUDGE results. Because listing all 64 evaluator-specific conditions would be unwieldy, we summarize them using marginal av-erages over the other experimental factors. Specif-ically, under Model , each value is averaged over all demonstration types and demonstration counts for that model; under Demonstration Type , each value is averaged over all simulation models and demonstration counts for that demonstration type; and under Demonstration Count , each value is averaged over all simulation models and demon-stration types for that demonstration count. The 

Avg row reports the mean across evaluators. 

G Base Judges and PERSONA JUDGE Preference Distribution 

Figure 8 shows the individual evaluator preference distribution across Prefer A, Neutral, and Prefer B for both harmlessness and helpfulness datasets. Tables 7 and 8 show the preference distribution rate for the Base Judge, P ERSONA JUDGE , and hu-man on both harmlessness and helpfulness datasets. 

H Significance Tests and Controls 

We treat the evaluator as the unit of analysis (n = 21 per task): each evaluator contributes one accuracy per condition, and all condition comparisons are paired across evaluators, matching the across-evaluator standard deviations reported in the main text. We report non-parametric tests as primary (Wilcoxon signed-rank for paired contrasts; Friedman for omnibus) and 

Figure 8: Evaluator judgment distribution for the Harm-lessness and Helpfulness datasets. 

corroborate with parametric analogues (one-sample / paired t; repeated-measures ANOVA). Pairwise families are Holm-corrected, and the 64-condition family is additionally controlled with Benjamini–Hochberg FDR ( α = 0.05 ). Composed three-class judgments are coded as 

{1= prefer A , 2= no preference , 3= prefer B }

throughout the analysis. 

H.1 Alignment 

Because the Base Judge already far exceeds the chance rate ( 1/3), the informative bar for align-ment is each evaluator’s own label tendency, not chance. Per-evaluator simulatability is not signif-icantly above a per-evaluator majority-class base-line that always predicts each individual’s own most frequent label (Table 9); it does, as a san-ity check, clear the chance rate in both tasks and at every factor level (one-sample t and Wilcoxon, all Table 5: Evaluator-level simulation accuracy on the harmlessness dataset. The Model Judgment Baseline columns report each model’s zero-shot LLM-as-Judge accuracy — simulating each response pair directly, with no in-context demonstrations and no evaluator persona — scored against each individual evaluator’s own ground-truth labels (the same 60-item test split used for the other columns). This isolates the model’s prior, against which evaluator-specific demonstrations are compared. The remaining columns show marginal averages for P ERSONA JUDGE : Model 

averages over demonstration types and demonstration counts, Demonstration Type averages over models and demonstration counts, and Demonstration Count averages over models and demonstration types.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

> Evaluator Model Judgment Baseline Model Demonstration Type Demonstration Count C-3.5 C-3.7 DS-R1 Nova C-3.5 C-3.7 DS-R1 Nova JJ+IT J+IT+RR J+RR 1-S 2-S 4-S 8-S
> 10.550 0.567 0.483 0.500 0.483 0.488 0.524 0.514 0.532 0.448 0.514 0.515 0.476 0.489 0.543 0.501 40.300 0.200 0.167 0.183 0.530 0.471 0.414 0.365 0.559 0.509 0.335 0.375 0.202 0.551 0.413 0.614 50.583 0.500 0.417 0.467 0.527 0.468 0.456 0.468 0.479 0.432 0.501 0.506 0.453 0.512 0.473 0.481 12 0.617 0.633 0.550 0.567 0.523 0.456 0.487 0.565 0.529 0.452 0.508 0.541 0.500 0.483 0.524 0.523 14 0.400 0.467 0.350 0.367 0.447 0.447 0.457 0.416 0.431 0.449 0.416 0.471 0.425 0.453 0.437 0.452 15 0.533 0.533 0.483 0.450 0.531 0.497 0.503 0.546 0.527 0.520 0.503 0.527 0.521 0.515 0.494 0.548 17 0.183 0.183 0.067 0.050 0.631 0.574 0.518 0.401 0.522 0.534 0.467 0.601 0.300 0.442 0.775 0.607 19 0.383 0.400 0.317 0.283 0.601 0.532 0.513 0.474 0.508 0.541 0.557 0.514 0.455 0.495 0.574 0.596 20 0.400 0.400 0.383 0.417 0.518 0.466 0.463 0.488 0.474 0.431 0.477 0.551 0.440 0.485 0.504 0.504 21 0.417 0.450 0.433 0.433 0.451 0.430 0.439 0.425 0.455 0.422 0.444 0.424 0.443 0.434 0.444 0.424 22 0.567 0.567 0.433 0.467 0.553 0.483 0.499 0.526 0.537 0.475 0.498 0.552 0.500 0.480 0.526 0.555 23 0.633 0.667 0.533 0.567 0.574 0.507 0.599 0.580 0.566 0.573 0.515 0.607 0.593 0.471 0.590 0.607 24 0.600 0.650 0.600 0.650 0.492 0.434 0.560 0.579 0.538 0.453 0.553 0.522 0.534 0.523 0.517 0.492 25 0.333 0.300 0.283 0.283 0.394 0.400 0.367 0.341 0.358 0.376 0.296 0.471 0.309 0.346 0.376 0.470 26 0.617 0.567 0.583 0.550 0.506 0.447 0.572 0.489 0.507 0.481 0.506 0.519 0.538 0.503 0.521 0.452 27 0.350 0.383 0.283 0.350 0.478 0.454 0.427 0.410 0.451 0.406 0.418 0.495 0.427 0.403 0.485 0.454 28 0.550 0.517 0.483 0.483 0.421 0.419 0.466 0.439 0.445 0.392 0.449 0.458 0.426 0.450 0.427 0.441 29 0.567 0.650 0.483 0.483 0.523 0.501 0.480 0.516 0.503 0.477 0.516 0.524 0.512 0.484 0.516 0.508 30 0.583 0.617 0.567 0.583 0.500 0.465 0.554 0.538 0.535 0.454 0.525 0.542 0.483 0.539 0.529 0.505 31 0.467 0.383 0.450 0.417 0.371 0.378 0.374 0.391 0.399 0.317 0.373 0.425 0.342 0.403 0.389 0.380 32 0.483 0.450 0.450 0.433 0.496 0.434 0.447 0.418 0.418 0.446 0.475 0.456 0.445 0.449 0.443 0.458 Avg 0.482 0.480 0.419 0.428 0.502 0.464 0.482 0.471 0.489 0.457 0.469 0.505 0.444 0.472 0.500 0.503

p < 0.001 ). P ERSONA JUDGE therefore aligns with individuals well beyond chance, but we do not find evidence that it improves over each individual’s marginal label tendency. This supports positioning PERSONA JUDGE as a complement to, rather than a replacement for, simple baseline predictors. 

H.2 Factor Effects: Omnibus Tests 

Configuration matters overall: a Friedman om-nibus across all 64 model × shot × demonstration-type conditions is highly significant in both tasks (χ2(63) = 191 .4 Harmlessness, 164 .0 Help-fulness, p < 0.001 ). Table 10 reports per-factor effects under repeated-measures ANOVA and Friedman. Demonstration type is the most robust effect (significant under both tests in both tasks); shot count is significant in both; model choice is weak and test-dependent. The model × demonstration-type interaction is signifi-cant in both tasks (ANOVA p < 0.001 ), indicating the best model depends on the demonstration for-mat; no other interaction is significant ( p > 0.16 ). 

H.3 Pairwise Contrasts 

Table 11 reports the Holm-corrected Wilcoxon con-trasts within each factor (Cohen’s d paired). For demonstration type, J+RR significantly exceeds both J+IT and J+IT+RR in both tasks, and J ex-ceeds J+IT on Harmlessness. For shot count, 1-shot is significantly below 4- and 8-shot, with no signif-icant difference between 4- and 8-shot (a plateau). For model, the only significant pair is Claude-3.5-Sonnet > Claude-3.7-Sonnet on Harmlessness. 

H.4 Per-Configuration Gains over the Base Judge 

Beyond the directional breadth reported in §5.1.1 (43/64 Harmlessness and 50/64 Helpfulness configurations improve over their same-model Base Judge), we examine which gains survive multiple-comparison correction. Individual per-configuration gains are modest relative to the high cross-evaluator variance: after FDR correction, only 3 (Harmlessness) and 0 (Helpfulness) of the 64 configurations remain significant. The recom-mended configuration (Claude-3.5-Sonnet, 8-shot, J+RR) is significant as a single planned compari-son ( +0 .099 , p = 0 .046 Harmlessness; +0 .058 ,

p = 0.008 Helpfulness). Consistent with the telemetry finding, one telemetry-bearing configu-ration is significantly worse than its Base Judge (Claude-3.7-Sonnet, 1-shot, J+IT+RR; −0.068 ,FDR-significant). Across all 2,016 pairwise com-parisons among the 64 conditions, no single config-Table 6: Evaluator-level simulation accuracy on the helpfulness dataset. The Model Judgment Baseline columns report each model’s zero-shot LLM-as-Judge accuracy — simulating each response pair directly, with no in-context demonstrations and no evaluator persona — scored against each individual evaluator’s own ground-truth labels (the same 60-item test split used for the other columns). This isolates the model’s prior, against which evaluator-specific demonstrations are compared. The remaining columns show marginal averages for P ERSONA JUDGE : Model 

averages over demonstration types and demonstration counts, Demonstration Type averages over models and demonstration counts, and Demonstration Count averages over models and demonstration types. 

Evaluator Model Judgment Baseline Model Demonstration Type Demonstration Count C-3.5 C-3.7 DS-R1 Nova C-3.5 C-3.7 DS-R1 Nova J J+IT J+IT+RR J+RR 1-S 2-S 4-S 8-S 

1 0.617 0.567 0.617 0.617 0.565 0.587 0.617 0.650 0.592 0.589 0.602 0.635 0.584 0.622 0.608 0.603 2 0.700 0.733 0.667 0.700 0.619 0.658 0.639 0.698 0.624 0.644 0.671 0.675 0.648 0.638 0.668 0.660 3 0.500 0.433 0.483 0.417 0.427 0.429 0.428 0.467 0.418 0.421 0.445 0.468 0.422 0.431 0.454 0.444 4 0.367 0.367 0.317 0.350 0.474 0.447 0.373 0.397 0.413 0.440 0.405 0.433 0.439 0.431 0.426 0.395 5 0.567 0.467 0.450 0.550 0.504 0.517 0.437 0.509 0.470 0.468 0.525 0.504 0.426 0.517 0.518 0.506 6 0.483 0.467 0.400 0.483 0.424 0.452 0.429 0.439 0.429 0.427 0.434 0.453 0.409 0.439 0.425 0.471 7 0.467 0.450 0.433 0.417 0.481 0.514 0.473 0.457 0.477 0.483 0.492 0.473 0.473 0.506 0.477 0.469 8 0.567 0.567 0.500 0.617 0.538 0.527 0.524 0.542 0.553 0.491 0.532 0.554 0.504 0.529 0.545 0.552 9 0.600 0.700 0.683 0.683 0.615 0.634 0.688 0.684 0.631 0.630 0.676 0.683 0.623 0.650 0.662 0.687 10 0.333 0.267 0.283 0.317 0.438 0.406 0.389 0.394 0.440 0.365 0.340 0.482 0.408 0.368 0.430 0.420 11 0.533 0.517 0.483 0.550 0.465 0.508 0.492 0.532 0.497 0.465 0.500 0.535 0.517 0.508 0.495 0.477 12 0.550 0.617 0.567 0.600 0.557 0.574 0.585 0.597 0.566 0.576 0.613 0.559 0.512 0.599 0.594 0.609 13 0.483 0.533 0.500 0.483 0.516 0.489 0.495 0.503 0.514 0.480 0.485 0.523 0.469 0.495 0.507 0.531 14 0.417 0.367 0.283 0.250 0.420 0.423 0.373 0.330 0.343 0.408 0.376 0.419 0.315 0.397 0.423 0.412 15 0.583 0.667 0.650 0.600 0.562 0.571 0.548 0.588 0.569 0.515 0.606 0.578 0.515 0.556 0.598 0.599 16 0.367 0.367 0.367 0.367 0.433 0.439 0.425 0.391 0.450 0.383 0.399 0.455 0.402 0.478 0.402 0.405 17 0.283 0.250 0.217 0.250 0.493 0.510 0.427 0.337 0.377 0.419 0.394 0.577 0.546 0.377 0.442 0.402 18 0.483 0.550 0.483 0.533 0.516 0.546 0.545 0.555 0.550 0.551 0.519 0.542 0.501 0.545 0.560 0.555 19 0.450 0.467 0.400 0.483 0.458 0.475 0.465 0.448 0.439 0.432 0.482 0.493 0.430 0.470 0.467 0.479 20 0.550 0.633 0.650 0.583 0.568 0.608 0.616 0.632 0.597 0.580 0.626 0.621 0.587 0.594 0.610 0.633 21 0.600 0.633 0.667 0.600 0.557 0.552 0.600 0.623 0.582 0.560 0.587 0.603 0.582 0.576 0.585 0.589 Avg 0.500 0.506 0.481 0.498 0.506 0.517 0.503 0.513 0.501 0.492 0.510 0.537 0.491 0.511 0.519 0.519 

Table 7: Base vs. Simulated Preferences Distribution Harmlessness 

Judgment Provider Prefer A Neutral Prefer B Claude-3.5 (Base) 0.453 0.018 0.529 + P ERSONA JUDGE 0.395 0.155 0.450 

Claude-3.7 (Base) 0.426 0.023 0.551 + P ERSONA JUDGE 0.404 0.126 0.470 

DeepSeek-R1 (Base) 0.412 0.009 0.579 + P ERSONA JUDGE 0.331 0.203 0.466 

Nova-Premier (Base) 0.505 0.010 0.484 + P ERSONA JUDGE 0.416 0.103 0.481 

Human 0.276 0.439 0.286 

uration is significantly best after correction (Holm 

0/2016 on both tasks; FDR 117 /2016 Harmless-ness and 0/2016 Helpfulness). 

H.5 Cross-Evaluator Personalization Control 

To isolate the personalized component from the general benefit of demonstrations, we compare PERSONA JUDGE against a control that holds the model, demonstration type, and shot count fixed but draws the demonstrations from non-target eval-uators. Because each item is annotated by several evaluators and P ERSONA JUDGE already produced a prediction for each, the control reuses those ex-isting predictions (no extra inference): for target 

ei and item x, we score each non-target evaluator 

Table 8: Base vs. Simulated Preferences Distribution Helpfulness 

Judgment Provider Prefer A Neutral Prefer B Claude-3.5 (Base) 0.487 0.001 0.512 + P ERSONA JUDGE 0.408 0.125 0.467 

Claude-3.7 (Base) 0.441 0.022 0.537 + P ERSONA JUDGE 0.397 0.108 0.494 

DeepSeek-R1 (Base) 0.447 0.007 0.547 + P ERSONA JUDGE 0.352 0.152 0.496 

Nova-Premier (Base) 0.489 0.040 0.471 + P ERSONA JUDGE 0.477 0.114 0.409 

Human 0.340 0.311 0.349              

> Harmlessness Helpfulness Mean accuracy ( ±SD) 0.480 0.050 0.510 0.082
> vs. chance ( 1/3)p < 0.001 p < 0.001
> vs. per-evaluator majority-class ( ∆)−0.019 +0 .042
> vs. per-evaluator majority-class ( p)0.95 0.14

Table 9: Alignment of per-evaluator simulatability (n = 21 ). Above chance in both tasks; not above each evaluator’s majority-class baseline. 

ej ’s prediction (same model/type/shot) against ei’s own gold and average over all such evaluators. It is leakage-free, as P ERSONA JUDGE already excludes the test item from each evaluator’s demonstrations, and is computed on the matched multi-annotator subset ( 84 .1% of pairs). PERSONA JUDGE outperforms the control over-Harmlessness Helpfulness Factor ANOVA p Fried. p ANOVA p Fried. p                        

> Model 0.017 0.054 0.464 0.041
> Shot count 0.012 0.027 0.010 0.001
> Demonstration type <0.001 <0.001 <0.001 <0.001
> Model ×Demo <0.001 —<0.001 —

Table 10: Per-factor omnibus tests. RM-ANOVA main effects (and the significant Model ×Demo interaction) and per-factor Friedman tests ( n = 21 ). Friedman is not factorial, so the interaction row is ANOVA-only. 

Factor Contrast ∆ pHolm 

Demonstration type 

Harmless J+RR > J+IT 0.048 0.011 

Harmless J+RR > J+IT+RR 0.036 0.022 

Harmless J > J+IT 0.033 0.015 

Helpful J+RR > J 0.035 0.002 

Helpful J+RR > J+IT 0.045 0.002 

Shot count 

Harmless 8-S > 1-S 0.060 0.032 

Harmless 4-S > 1-S 0.056 0.028 

Helpful 4-S > 1-S 0.028 0.026 

Helpful 8-S > 1-S 0.028 0.036 

Model 

Harmless C-3.5 > C-3.7 0.038 0.002 

Table 11: Significant Holm-corrected Wilcoxon pair-wise contrasts ( p < 0.05 ). All contrasts (including non-significant ones) are in the workbook. 

all by +0 .028 on Harmlessness ( 0.477 vs. 0.450 ,

p = 0 .019 ) and +0 .044 on Helpfulness ( 0.515 vs. 

0.471 , p < 0.001 ). The advantage is negligible at one demonstration and grows with shot count (Ta-ble 12)—the signature of genuine personalization rather than of additional labeled examples—is posi-tive across all four judge models and all demonstra-tion types, and is positive for 15/21 (Harmlessness) and 20/21 (Helpfulness) evaluators. 

I Error Analysis 

This appendix expands the RQ3 finding (§5.1.3) that PERSONA JUDGE captures genuine—but modest—individual variation rather than a group prior. For each item we define its consensus la-bel as the majority of the three human annotations (items with no majority, i.e. 1-1-1, are excluded); an (annotator, item) pair is a deviation when the annotator’s own label differs from that consensus. Unless noted, metrics pool over all 4 models, 4 demonstration types, and 4 shot counts and are scored against each evaluator’s own gold labels.                      

> Harmlessness Helpfulness Shots PERSONA JUDGE Control PERSONA JUDGE Control 10.443 0.445 0.496 0.456
> 20.471 0.447 0.516 0.473
> 40.496 0.454 0.522 0.474
> 80.501 0.460 0.525 0.483

Table 12: Cross-evaluator control by shot count (control = mean over all non-target evaluators). The matched ad-vantage is absent at 1 shot and grows with more demon-strations. 

Predictor Harmless Helpful Oracle consensus 0.798 0.767 

PERSONA JUDGE 0.490 0.527 

Global majority-class 0.451 0.343 

Per-evaluator majority-class 0.502 0.464 

Table 13: Per-individual accuracy of PERSONA -JUDGE vs. reference predictors on the consensus-eligible subset, all scored against each evaluator’s own gold labels. 

I.1 Baseline comparison 

Table 13 compares P ERSONA JUDGE against the reference predictors of §4.5, all scored against each evaluator’s own gold labels on the consensus-eligible subset (so only the prediction rule differs across rows). P ERSONA JUDGE sits far below the oracle consensus baseline (it is not reproducing the group answer), above the global majority-class baseline, and approximately at each evaluator’s own majority-class baseline—genuine individual signal that does not yet exceed a person’s marginal label tendency. 

I.2 Capturing individual deviation 

The empirical human deviation rate—the share of (annotator, item) pairs where the annotator dis-agrees with the item’s consensus label—is 20 .2% 

(Harmlessness) and 23 .3% (Helpfulness). Devia-tion items are the decisive test of individual capture: because the annotator’s gold differs from the con-sensus, any group- or consensus-based predictor scores 0 on them by definition , so any accuracy here must come from individual-level signal. We quantify capture with three complementary metrics (Table 14). 

Deviation accuracy is the fraction of deviation items on which P ERSONA JUDGE predicts the an-notator’s exact label. At 0.367 / 0.360 , P ERSONA -JUDGE gets right more than a third of the cases a group prior cannot. 

Alignment lift asks whether PERSONA -Task Model Dev. acc. Align. lift Capt. dir. Harmless                               

> All 0.367 +0.117 0.617
> C-3.5 0.365 +0.127 0.633 C-3.7 0.373 +0.099 0.620 DS-R1 0.382 +0.123 0.633 Nova 0.350 +0.117 0.582 Helpful
> All 0.360 +0.147 0.632
> C-3.5 0.370 +0.147 0.640 C-3.7 0.368 +0.152 0.648 DS-R1 0.375 +0.155 0.633 Nova 0.327 +0.135 0.605

Table 14: Deviation handling per judge model. 

Dev. acc. : PERSONA JUDGE accuracy on devia-tion items (consensus predictor = 0). Align. lift : P (model deviates | annotator deviates ) −

P (model deviates | annotator conforms ). Capt. dir. : of deviations, the share landing on the annotator’s actual label (chance 0.500 ). 

JUDGE deviates when the annotator does .It is P (model deviates | annotator deviates ) −

P (model deviates | annotator conforms ): how much more often the model breaks from consensus on items where the individual also breaks from it, versus items where the individual agrees with the group. A positive value ( +0 .117 / +0 .147 ) means the model’s deviations are selective —triggered on the same items the individual deviates on—rather than random noise. 

Captured direction asks whether, when PERSON -

> A

JUDGE does deviate on a deviation item, it picks the annotator’s actual non-consensus label rather than the other one. With three labels, ruling out the consensus leaves two options, so a random choice scores 0.500 ; P ERSONA JUDGE reaches 0.617 /

0.632 , so it recovers not just that an individual deviates but the direction of the deviation. These results show P ERSONA JUDGE ’s depar-tures from consensus are individual-aligned in both 

incidence (alignment lift) and direction (captured direction), and that it recovers individual labels (deviation accuracy) unattainable from group-level information. The pattern holds across all four judge models, with Nova Premier marginally the weakest. 

I.3 Confusion matrices and per-class metrics 

Table 15 reports row-normalized confusion ma-trices (diagonal = recall). The Neutral (no-preference) class is by far the hardest to recover (recall 0.356 / 0.242 ) and is most often misread as a directional preference; direct A ↔B reversals are comparatively rare. Table 16 gives per-class precision/recall/F1.                        

> gold \pred ANBHarmless A60.7 20.9 18.5 N35.8 35.6 28.6 B25.8 18.9 55.4
> Helpful A58.2 11.2 30.6 N33.3 24.2 42.5 B23.5 8.7 67.8

Table 15: Row-normalized confusion matrices (%, diag-onal = recall). A = Prefer A, N = Neutral, B = Prefer B.                       

> Task Class Prec. Rec. F1 Harmless Prefer A 0.408 0.607 0.488 Neutral 0.590 0.356 0.444 Prefer B 0.476 0.554 0.512 Helpful Prefer A 0.522 0.582 0.550 Neutral 0.522 0.242 0.330 Prefer B 0.497 0.678 0.573

Table 16: Per-class precision, recall, and F1 for P ER -

> SONA

JUDGE , pooled over all configurations.