Title: 2606.05222v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.05222v1

Published Time: Fri, 05 Jun 2026 00:02:02 GMT

Number of Pages: 59

Markdown Content:
WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 1

Where’s the Structure? A Systematic Literature Review of Empirical Research on Human -

AI Collaboration and Hybrid Intelligence for Learning 

Luis P. Prieto 

GSIC -EMIC research group, Universidad de Valladolid (Spain) 

luispablo.prieto@uva.es 

Juan I. Asensio -Pérez 

GSIC -EMIC research group, Universidad de Valladolid (Spain) 

juaase@tel.uva.es 

María Jesús Rodríguez -Triana 

GSIC -EMIC research group, Universidad de Valladolid (Spain) 

mjrodtri@uva.es 

Mohamed Saban 

GSIC -EMIC research group, Universidad de Valladolid (Spain) 

GICAP research group, Department of Digitization, Universidad de Burgos (Spain) WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 2

msaban@ubu.es 

Yannis Dimitriadis 

GSIC -EMIC research group, Universidad de Valladolid (Spain) 

yannis@tel.uva.es 

Author Notes 

Luis P. Prieto: https://orcid.org/0000 -0002 -0057 -0682 

Juan I. Asensio -Pérez: https://orcid.org/0000 -0002 -1114 -2819 

María Jesús Rodríguez -Triana: https://orcid.org/0000 -0001 -8639 -1257 

Mohamed Saban: https://orcid.org/0000 -0003 -3412 -8574 

Yannis Dimitriadis: https://orcid.org/0000 -0001 -7275 -2242 

Contact information: Luis P. Prieto, School of Telecommunications Engineering, Paseo 

Belén 15. Campus Miguel Delibes. 47011 Valladolid, Spain. Email: luispablo.prieto@uva.es WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 3

Abstract 

Artificial intelligence (AI) has been applied across educational contexts to support learning. One 

approach to such support is "human -AI collaboration" (also termed "hybrid intelligence"), where 

human(s) and AI components interact to promote human learning . However, as in human -to -

human computer -supported collaborative learning (CSCL), unstructured interaction does not 

necessarily produce an effective learning experience. This paper reports a systematic literature 

review of empirical studies (N=62) on human -AI collaboration and hybrid intelligence for 

learning support. The review characterizes collaboration processes, their structures, and contexts 

of application. It also extracts emerging design knowledge and research gaps. Researchers and 

technology design ers can use these findings as a starting point for structuring more effective AI -

enhanced technologies for collaboration, in educational practice and future research. 

Keywords: Human -AI collaboration, Artificial intelligence in education, Literature 

reviews, Hybrid intelligence, Computer -supported collaborative learning. WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 4

Introduction 

Collaborative learning (CL) is often defined as "a situation in which two or more people 

learn or attempt to learn something together" (Dillenbourg, 1999, p. 1) . CL has been 

characterized in multiple ways (e.g., equality and mutuality of influence, group processing, 

positive interdependence, ... see O’Donnell & Hmelo -Silver, 2013) , with no universally accepted 

definition. Nevertheless, decades of research in (computer -supported) CL have evidenced its 

many key benefits: improved social outcomes, higher achievement, more time on task, better 

psychological health, higher -quality reaso ning, etc. (Johnson & Johnson, 2009; O’Donnell & 

Hmelo -Silver, 2013) .

Research on collaborative and cooperative learning has also shown that these benefits 

vary depending on the structure of learner interactions (e.g., Slavin, 1996) . Many researchers 

have observed that "the richness of social interactions (conflict resolution, elaborated 

explanations, mutual regulation, ...)" predicts learning outcomes, prompting the design of scripts 

for "enhancing the probability that these knowled ge productive interactions occur during 

collaboration" (Dillenbourg & Jermann, 2007, p. 276) . A significant strand of (CS)CL research 

has thus investigated scripted collaboration (Kollar et al., 2006) and proposed recurring patterns 

of effective CL, such as Jigsaw , Pyramid (see Hernández Leo et al., 2005) , or ArgueGraph 

(Jermann & Dillenbourg, 2003) .

A common distinction in this literature is between macro - and micro -scripting (Kobbe et 

al., 2007) . Macro -scripts describe activities over longer time segments across multiple social 

planes (individual, small -group, class -wide), specifying both what learners do and how 

(Dillenbourg & Jermann, 2007) . Micro -scripts, in contrast, provide finer -grained, WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 5

psychologically -oriented scaffolding to individual students, such as sentence starters and 

question prompts (Kollar et al., 2006) .

Against this backdrop, recent advances in artificial intelligence (especially, generative 

AI) have prompted the emergence of "human -AI collaboration" (HAIC) as a potential strategy to 

support human learning. HAIC (sometimes called "human -AI teaming") has a longer history in 

human -computer interaction, though a widely accepted definition remains elusive. Fragiadakis 

and colleagues (2025) describe it as "a symbiotic partnership where humans and AI work 

together to achieve shared goals", typically grounded in the complementary strengths of human 

and artificial intelligence (e.g., intuitive vs. analytic reasoning; Dellermann et al., 2019) . A 

related concept, "hybrid intelligence" (HI), draws on distributed cognition (Hutchins, 1995) and 

frames the combination of human and artificial intelligences as a single, unified system, defined 

as "the ability to accomplish complex goals by combining human and artificial intelligence to 

collectively achieve superior results than each of them cou ld have done in separation and 

continuously improve by learning from each other" (Dellermann et al., 2021) .

With recent advances in machine learning and generative AI (GenAI), AI systems have 

gained considerable flexibility in human interaction and increasingly agentic features (see 

reviews by Mittal et al., 2024; Noroozi et al., 2024) . As a consequence, HAIC and HI have been 

proposed as useful conceptualizations to specifically support human learning (Cukurova, 2025; 

Gyasi et al., 2025; Järvelä et al., 2025) .

Given what we know about the variable effectiveness of unstructured human 

collaboration, it stands to reason that HAIC and HI will face similar problems without structures 

designed to foster productive human -AI interactions. This assumption appears increas ingly 

validated by studies documenting the deleterious effects of learners' GenAI use, from WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 6

overreliance (Hou et al., 2025) to what some researchers call "metacognitive laziness" (Y. Fan et 

al., 2025) .

This paper examines the current empirical evidence on the use of HAIC and HI for 

human learning, focusing specifically on the HAI/HI collaboration process : the "how" of such 

collaboration (Labadze et al., 2023) . Our aim is to understand what kinds of HAI/HI 

collaboration structures are being investigated by researchers , with the ultimate goal of 

producing design knowledge (e.g., HAIC/HI “design patterns” for learning, cf. Alexander et al., 

1977) reusable by researchers, educational technology designers, and practitioners. This also 

relates to key concerns in the AI in education (AIED) field, such as tensions between human 

control vs. AI automation (see, e.g., Cukurova, 2025; Holstein et al., 2020; Molenaar, 2022) , and 

learner agency (Cukurova, 2026; Darvishi et al., 2024) .

To this end, we conducted a systematic literature review (SLR) of empirical studies on 

HAIC and HI to support learning (vs. AI uses that support or automate teaching, see e.g., Dutta 

& Kannan Poyil, 2025 in workplace learning; or Rokkones & Giannakos, 2025 in K -12) . We 

describe the methods used to narrow 1,632 retrieved sources to an in -depth analysis of N=62 

papers, present our findings, and discuss implications, emergent design knowledge, limitations, 

and future research lines. 

Related Work: Literature Reviews in Human -AI Collaboration and Hybrid 

Intelligence for Learning 

To motivate this systematic literature review, we situate our work among prior reviews in 

adjacent areas. Reviews of HAIC exist, but they mostly follow an HCI tradition and emphasize 

how HAIC supports (often business) tasks in organizations (M. Braun et al., 2023) , or in decision 

support systems (Gomez et al., 2025) . Reviews of HI show a similar bias: Wiethof and Bittner WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 7

(2021) examine how humans and AIs learn together in HAIC and extracts recurring HAI 

"collaborative learning processes" (e.g., decision support by explanation, exploration, etc.). 

Hemmer et al. (2021) focus on collaboration in explainable AI (XAI) for decision support 

systems. Kamar (2016) centers on how humans help AIs learn (the opposite of our aim here), and 

Pileggi (2024) focuses on particular technologies (ontologies) in HI. Despite their merits, all 

these reviews have aims and concerns remote from educational technologies. Our aim is thus 

closest to Wiethof ’s and Gomez ’s reviews in our searching for interaction structures and 

collaboration processes, but with the explicit goal of supporting human learning .

High -level overviews of AIED also exist. Beyond reviews already mentioned (like Mittal 

et al., 2024; Noroozi et al., 2024) , Zawacki -Richter et al.’s (2019) classic review identifies four 

key application areas of AI in education, yet it does not cover HAIC in detail. Chiu (2024) does 

include a "learning" domain (i.e., AI to enhance learning) and identifies "roles of AI", including 

"human -machine conversations" and "analyzing student work for feedback". It does not, 

however, unpack collaboration processes, and its publication date predates the emergence of 

GenAI. Wang et al.’s (2024) review is more recent, but treats CL support as a small sub -category 

(5 studies) and largely represents a flavor of HAIC where the AI facilitates or monitors human –

human interaction. Yang et al. (2025) review GenAI applications for CL, but mainly characterize 

form factors (e.g., chatbots), kinds of learning (e.g., self -regulated learning), learning outcomes, 

and broad CL aspects (e.g., argumentation), without analyzing HAIC/HI processes and their 

structures. 

Within secondary research on AI in education, some reviews target specific system types. 

Intelligent tutoring systems (ITSs) are well covered (e.g., Du Boulay & Luckin, 2016) , but we 

contend they primarily substitute teaching tasks (e.g., through exercise delivery towards an WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 8

adaptive learning pathway) rather than directly interacting or learning together with the learner; 

without interaction, there cannot be collaboration (cf. Dillenbourg, 1999) . Reviews of 

educational chatbots are actually closer to HAIC for learning. Two literature reviews (Okonkwo 

& Ade -Ibijola, 2021; Wollny et al., 2021) synthesize benefits and challenges of such systems, 

but not the process of collaboration; they also omit non -chatbot HAIC, and also cover non -

learning uses (e.g., teaching support, frequently asked questions), predating the recent GenAI 

wave. More recent chatbot reviews (Deng & Yu, 2023; Labadze et al., 2023) likewise emphasize 

benefits and disadvantages rather than how such benefits are achieved, and again exclude other 

AI system formats that could foster HAIC/HI for student learning. Deng and Yu do synthesize 

roles chatbots play (e.g., "learning partner," perhaps "teaching assistant"), which connects to the 

collaboration structures we seek. Han and colleagues’ (2025) scoping review of intelligent 

"learning companion systems" (LCS) overlaps more closely our HAIC/HI for learning focus: 

LCSs simulate human -like characteristics to provide support and companionship. Han and 

colleagues enumerate up to 14 AI roles, from "mot ivator" or "goal setter" to "co -learner" or 

"troublemaker." Although narrower, this role taxonomy does offer actionable design knowledge, 

analogous to roles in (human -to -human) CSCL scripting. 

Finally, reviews of AI for collaborative learning (which, by definition, includes HAIC/HI 

for learning) offer relevant coverage but remain AI -centric. Tan et al. (2022) categorize 

techniques (e.g., clustering, natural language processing – NLP) and goals, but does not detail 

pedagogical mechanisms, processes, or structures, and it predates the GenAI surge. Kovari 

(2025) , on the other hand, reviews AI applications in higher education (HE) and foregrounds 

algorithms, including CL supports that are not necessarily HAIC/HI (e.g., recommender systems WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 9

or personalizers). While they stress "good task design", they provide limited guidance on what 

interaction structures constitute such good design. 

We therefore conclude that, to the best of our knowledge, no existing literature review 

specifically targets HAIC and HI used for student learning , analyzes the HAI/HI 

collaboration/interaction process and its structures in detail, and is recent enough to include the 

recent wave of GenAI -based applications . This gap motivates the review presented in the 

remainder of this paper. 

Materials and Methods 

Research Questions 

To understand the current state of empirical research on HAIC and HI for learning, and 

the collaborative processes and structures researchers have proposed, we conducted a systematic 

literature review following PRISMA guidelines (Page et al., 2021) . This SLR adopted a mixed -

methods approach, emphasizing qualitative and interpretive analysis over quantitative synthesis, 

given the heterogeneous and exploratory current state of this research area. The SLR addressed 

the following research questions, each illuminated through multiple informative questions (IQs) 

in an anticipated data reduction scheme (see Fig.1) (Miles & Huberman, 1994) :

● RQ1: What kinds of empirical research have been conducted about HAIC/HI for 

(human) learning? 

● RQ2: How is HAIC/HI conceptualized in this body of work? 

● RQ3: How are HAIC/HI (for learning) processes structured in this body of work? 

● RQ4: What design knowledge and research gaps can be derived from this body of 

research? WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 10 

Figure 1 

Overarching research question, particular research questions, and informative questions 

explored in the systematic literature review 

Review Method 

Eligibility criteria . We sought papers reporting empirical studies (i.e., reporting both 

methods and nontrivial empirical data) in the educational domain, focused on human learners 

interacting with AI elements toward the goal of learning. Exclusion criteria were: 

● Not an individual article (e.g., a full conference proceedings volume); 

● Full text not retrievable; 

● No abstract available; 

● Not written in a language accessible to the research team (primarily English and 

Spanish); WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 11 

● Not aimed at the educational domain; 

● Not an AI empirical study; 

● The AI’s objective is not to improve student learning (e.g., focuses on AI -teacher 

collaboration, or uses a student population but not paying attention to a learning 

process); 

● Learners do not directly interact with an actual AI (e.g., Wizard -of -Oz studies in 

which the student interacts with a human posing as an AI, student surveys about 

past independent use of AI, or expert panels); and 

● No details provided about the HAIC/HI process , or HAIC/HI not mentioned 

significantly in the text of the paper .

Information sources . Given the current state of flux of all AI -related fields and the large 

amounts of unvetted grey literature (e.g., preprints) being produced, and the fact that we try to 

encode best practices in HAIC/HI for learning, we prioritized established, peer -revie wed sources 

over works -in -progress and grey literature. We searched the two best -established 

multidisciplinary databases relevant to educational technologies: Web of Science (WoS) 1 and 

SCOPUS 2. These databases subsume additional field -specific databases such as ACM and IEEE. 

Search strategy . After an initial scoping of common synonyms beyond HAIC and HI 

(e.g., "human -AI teaming"), we built a query to capture the overlap between the HAIC/HI 

concept and the education/learning application research space. Other exclusion criteria were 

checked later, based on the paper’s metadata and full text. The query was applied to the titles, 

abstracts, and keywords of the sources:   

> 1https://www.webofscience.com/
> 2https://www.scopus.com/

WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 12 

("human -AI team" OR "human -artificial intelligence team" OR "human -AI 

collaboration" OR "human -artificial intelligence collaboration" OR "hybrid human -AI" OR 

"hybrid human -artificial intelligence" OR "hybrid human -system" OR "hybrid intelligence" OR 

"AI as sistant" OR "artificial intelligence assistant") AND ("teaching" OR "tutoring" OR 

"coaching" OR "learning" OR "teacher" OR "educator" OR "instructor" OR "learner" OR 

"student" OR "education" OR "educative"). 

We ran a first retrieval on May 2nd, 2024. Because research accelerated after the 

widespread use of GenAI technologies such as large language models (LLMs), we ran a second, 

updating retrieval on Apr 30th, 2025, restricted to years 2024 -2025. 

Study selection process . As shown in Figure 2 3, the first wave returned 869 records (640 

SCOPUS; 229 WoS) and the second returned 763 (572 SCOPUS; 191 WoS). After 

deduplication, five researchers applied inclusion/exclusion criteria in two stages. In Stage 1, the 

team screened titles, keywords, and abs tracts, keeping unclear cases for the next phase. In Stage 

2, full texts were screened to confirm empirical methods and data were present, and to verify that 

the HAIC/HI process was described in sufficient detail to code. In both stages, we began with all 

team members screening a shared sub -sample; disagreements and doubts were discussed until we 

reached full consensus on that sub -sample. We then distributed the remaining records across the 

team for independent screening. At the end of this process, the fin al corpus comprised N=62 

papers for in -depth analysis aligned with the RQs. 

Figure 2 

Source search and filtering process (cf. PRISMA guidelines)  

> 3See more details in the additional materials at
> https://osf.io/4wxh2/overview?view_only=9fcbf8ed4bdb405b8d812986f2c1c966

WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 13 

Data collection process . Full -text sources were analyzed manually using Google 

Forms/Spreadsheets, via a structured form corresponding to the IQs in Figure 1. The form 

combined closed categories (e.g., educational level in IQ1.2; micro -/macro -type of collaboration 

structure as p art of IQ3.1) with open responses (e.g., how is the collaboration process between 

learner and AI? IQ2.4). All team members independently coded a purposefully selected subset of 

four sources; disagreements and doubts were discussed un til resolved, sharpening shared 

understanding of the questions and categories. The remaining sources were then distributed 

among the team members. WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 14 

Synthesis approach . Closed -response IQs were synthesized using descriptive and visual 

statistics. For the majority of IQs, captured through open -response questions, we employed a 

qualitative synthesis approach using an inductive process modeled on reflexive thematic analysi s

(V. Braun & Clarke, 2006) . This approach treats themes as researcher -constructed interpretations 

rather than fixed, discoverable obje cts. For each IQ, one researcher reviewed all form responses 

(thus ensuring that each paper -IQ pair was examined by at least two researchers), disagreements 

were resolved, and the resulting categories and interpretations were discussed collectively by the 

whole team. 

Results 

RQ1: The State of Empirical Research in HAIC and HI for Learning 

Looking at basic descriptors of the analyzed papers (see also Figure 3 below), we observe 

a sharp recent increase in research in this area (year of publication, IQ1.1 in Figure 1), coinciding 

with the public emergence of GenAI. In fact, 2024 alone yielded more studies meeting our 

criteria (empirical works using HAIC/HI to support learning) than all previous years combined 

(Figure 3, top -left). The predominance of journal articles over conference papers (37 vs. 23) 

largely reflects our aim of identifying mor e established work (and the databases selected). 

Regarding educational settings (IQ1.2, Figure 3, top -right), most studies were conducted 

in higher education (57/62 studies). Only a few addressed other levels, such as C. -H. Lin et al. ’s 

(2025) exploration of GenAI for second -language writing in K -12, or were level -agnostic, such 

as Chen et al.’s (2024) study of how an LLM chatbot is used in modeling tasks with NetLogo. 

This imbalance is typical of early -stage fields, in which academics (mostly working in higher 

education) experiment with technologies in readily available settings. It may also reflect et hical 

concerns about testing experimental technologies with underage learners. WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 15 

The subject matter of the supported learning activities (IQ1.3, Figure 3, bottom -left) was 

quite varied. A large minority of studies focused on information technology and computer 

science (19/62), which is unsurprising given the likely disciplinary origin s of many researchers 

in the area. There was also notable representation of language, literature, and writing support 

(9/62), including Song et al.’s (2022) use of a pre -GenAI voice assistant to support second -

language learner pronunciation skills, or Taeza’s (2025) use of LLMs for writing practice. 

Design and other creative disciplines were also prominent (11/62, e.g., Gual -Ortí et al., 2025) .

Although these areas are not always central in other educational technology innovations, they 

align well with GenAI’s fluency in producing text and images, common outputs in such fields. 

They also fit HAIC/HI pedagogically, as these disciplines are often taught through teamwork. 

The learning tasks supported by HAIC/HI (IQ1.4) showed a similar pattern: writing tasks and 

design projects were especially common (13 papers each), followed by computer programming 

(7 papers, e.g., Hussein et al., 2024) , alongside a long tail of activities ranging from 

questionnaires and reflection to embodied exercises. Together, these suggest the flexibility of AI, 

especially GenAI, technologies. 

From a pedagogical perspective (IQ1.5, Figure 3, bottom -right), the large number of 

studies that did not define a clear pedagogical approach (22 papers) again suggests an early -

stage, technology -driven research area. Among studies that did specify a pedago gy, the most 

common were collaborative learning (18 papers, e.g., Ding & Chiu, 2024) and project -based 

learning (14 papers), which is consistent with our focus on HAIC/HI and with the fact that 

projects are often developed through teamwork. 

Figure 3 WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 16 

Descriptive characteristics of the N=62 reviewed papers. 

The reviewed papers’ research designs (IQ1.6) also reflect an early -stage, technology -

driven field. Most were case studies exploring technological possibilities (28 papers), followed 

by experimental studies comparing implementations (18 papers), for examp le "with versus 

without" AI support or across different AI conditions, such as Kumar et al.’s (2024) comparison 

of LLM -based reflections against no -reflection or lecture controls. We also identified 8 survey -

based studies (e.g., Rasnayaka et al., 2024) , along with several other less common 

methodologies. Sample sizes (IQ1.7) were likewise heterogeneous. Most studies involved tens of 

participants (38 papers), while 13 were conducted at the scale of hundreds, pointing to the 

scalability potential of this technology even at an early stage. Notable examples include Darvishi 

et al. (2024) and Hou et al. (2025) (with 1,625 and 1,818 participants, respectively), which used 

AI to support peer review of learning resources at scale and to develop a questionnaire WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 17 

instrument measuring modes of student reliance on AI (an aim that inherently requires large 

samples ).

The duration of the HAIC/HI interventions studied —that is, the period over which 

learners and AI systems interacted (IQ1.8) —was also highly variable, both in researchers' 

reporting and in actual length. Among studies providing enough detail on number and length of 

sessions and session design, many used single -session formats, such as Cai et al. ’s (2024) study 

of a chatbot participating in small -group learner conversations for 20 minutes in one session. 

This limitation has also been noted in recent critiques of GenAI -for -education studies (Weidlich 

et al., 2025) . We did, however, find longer deployments lasting multiple weeks or a semester 

(e.g., Parker et al., 2025) . A particularly notable case is G. Fan et al. (2025) , in which LLM 

support in programming courses was deployed over two academic years. At the same time, the 

longer interventions often appeared to involve limited structure or little in -depth observation of 

learner -AI interactions. 

Finally, regarding the aspects of learning examined in the analyzed papers (IQ1.9), target 

measures were diverse. Most studies (35/62) examined some aspect of the learning process, from 

qualitative analyses of conversations or video recordings to quantitat ive eye -tracking measures. 

General user experience measures, such as technology acceptance or suggestions for 

improvement, were also common (32 papers), as were measures of product/outcome quality (27 

papers, e.g., Kim et al., 2024) . By contrast, only 13 studies measured learning gains, even though 

this might be expected to be the central outcome of educational technology interventions. This 

pattern echoes recent critiques of the area (Yan, Greiff, et al., 2025; Yan, Pammer‐Schindler, et 

al., 2025) .WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 18 

RQ2: Characterizing HAIC and HI for Learning 

To understand the kinds of HAIC/HI being empirically studied, we first examined the 

types of AI used in interventions (IQ2.1). Generative AI was the most studied (45/62), 

predominantly LLM -based systems (e.g., ChatGPT), with a few studies using image -gene rating 

GenAI (e.g., Stable Diffusion, Midjourney - see Hwang et al., 2025; or Liu et al., 2025) . Eight 

studies featured classic machine -learning systems and another eight used non -LLM natural 

language processing. In rare cases, multiple AI types were combined (e.g., Weber et al., 2025 use 

of traditional machine learning with BERT to provide structured feedback on legal writing) .

Among LLM -based studies, 43/45 relied on online services (most commonly OpenAI's ChatGPT 

app or API), with only four using open -weight, locally -executed models (e.g., Weber et al., 2025 

using BERT) or remaining model -agnostic (a framework that can use different models as 

backend, in Alier et al., 2025) .

Regarding the key concept of interest in the reviewed papers (IQ2.2), HAIC was the most 

frequently used concept (45/62) versus 9 papers centered on HI; 17 papers revolved around "AI 

assistants". Surprisingly few studies explicitly defined HAIC. The six HAIC definitions 

identified (plus two via snowball sampling) varied considerably, but most denoted a task being 

done together , emphasized complementarity of human and AI abilities , and in some cases 

stressed augmenting rather than replacing humans while keepi ng responsibility and control with 

humans . Some definitions focused on task -oriented goals (e.g., improving performance), others 

on person -oriented goals (e.g., enhancing cognition). For instance, Gyasi et al. (2025) propose 

that "AI and humans work together by taking advantage of the capabilities of each party to boost 

performance". Among the 9 HI -centered studies, definitions emphasized cognition more heavily 

(the combination of human and machine intelligence) thoug h complementarity and task/person WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 19 

goals remained similarly prominent. Y. Fan et al. (2025) (citing Akata et al., 2020) define HI as 

the "combination of human and machine intelligence, augmenting human intellect and 

capabilities instead of replacing them and achieving goals that were unreachable by either 

humans or machines" (p. 491). Notably, none of the reviewed studies reconceptualized these 

general definitions for learning -specific contexts. The work of Dellerman n and colleagues (2021) 

defined HI as "the ability to accomplish complex goals by combining human and artificial 

intelligence to collectively achieve superior results and continuously improve by learning from 

each other." This definition appeared in both HAIC and HI studies (2 an d 3 times, respectively), 

suggesting conceptual interchangeability of those two concepts among researchers. The most -

cited education -specific definitional work is Järvelä et al. (2023) (itself pointing to Akata et al., 

2020) , alongside Holstein et al. (2020) , who use "hybrid adaptivity" to describe humans and 

AIED systems complementing each other toward improved task performance and/or co -learning. 

These references and definitions are consistent with similar works oriented towards teaching 

(e.g., Rokkones & Giannakos, 2025) .

Analyzing the AI's mode of contribution in the learner -AI team (IQ2.3, see Cui & 

Yasseri, 2024) further triangulates researchers' conceptualizations. A large majority (52/62 

papers) used an "AI assistant" mode, in which humans offload tasks or expect answers from the 

AI (e.g., a ChatGPT chatbot). Despite the HAIC/HI framing, only 10 studies portraye d a 

"teammate AI" — in which the AI operates as a roughly equal team member (e.g., a system 

promoting reflection after video analysis, in E. Yu, 2023) . Twelve works used a "coach AI" 

mode, providing feedback (e.g., the agent -in -the -loop supporting reflection in collaborative 

programming, in Sankaranarayanan et al., 2020) . Only one work used an "embodied AI" mode or 

explicitly supported multiple modes (the framework for educational agents in learning WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 20 

management systems by Alier et al., 2025) . Notably, several reviewed works exhibited 

"mislabeling" or "metaphor stretch". For example, the introduction of vanilla AI chatbots to 

which students offloaded tasks was presented as "AI introduced as a co -designer" (Adorni & 

Grosso, 2025, p. 1) or as a teammate (Darban, 2024) , reflecting the terminological fuzziness 

typical of early -stage research areas (cf. Borup et al., 2006; Rip & Voß, 2013) .

An inductive analysis of collaboration setups (IQ2.4) showed that most studies gave 

learners a vanilla, non -customized AI chatbot for student -initiated "collaboration" (34 studies), 

with some providing a pedagogically -modified chatbot for similar assistant -like cooperation (15 

studies; e.g., CodeAid, which offers specialized functions to support coding learning, in 

Kazemitabaar et al., 2024) . In 18 studies, learner -AI interaction was mediated by a socially -

enforced scaffold (typically, written or oral teacher instructions) which could be general (e.g., 

prompting tips, as in Garg et al., 2025; or Goel et al., 2023) or process -specific (e.g., designated 

AI use phases, as in Min et al., 2025) . Technological scaffolding integrated into system 

interfaces was less common (6 papers). Another recurring setup inserted the AI as an actor in 

human -to -human conversations (6 papers; e.g., Gutiérrez -Ferré et al., 2024) . While learner 

initiative dominated, notable exceptions exist: In Chen et al. (2024) , the AI actively gathered 

information to adapt future interactions. Less frequent setups included embodied or virtual 

reality simulations (3 papers, e.g., Tracy & Spantidi, 2025) , HCI -focused assistants (Da S. Soares 

et al., 2019) , and humans collaborating to build AI models (Mlynář et al., 2024) . Perhaps most 

unexpectedly, genuine co -learning processes , in which humans and AI share the same task or 

goal, were rare. Bosch et al.’s (2025) learning -oriented human -AI teaming research (where 

humans and simulated robots collaboratively learn about a rescue situation) and , to a lesser 

extent, Yu et al. (2025) , are notable exceptions. WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 21 

This connects to whether AI "learns" through its interaction with human learners, that is, 

whether any model update occurs during collaboration (IQ2.5). Aside from Bosch et al. (2025) ,

the answer is an overwhelming no . Some LLM -based systems retain past interactions in context 

to adapt responses (e.g., Chang et al., 2024) , but that falls well short of reinforcement -learning -

style model updates, which are known to have both benefits and dangers (Whittlestone et al., 

2021) . The near -total absence of discussion about AI learning across the reviewed papers 

suggests that researchers treat HAIC/HI more as a metaphor than as a concept to be taken to its 

full conceptual consequence. 

RQ3: HAIC and HI Structures for Learning 

Turning to our main aim (whether and how HAIC/HI processes were structured, IQ3.1), 

24 of 62 papers imposed no structure on human -AI interaction (what we term freeform 

interaction, e.g., Nguyen, Hong, et al., 2024; Zou & Huang, 2024) . The remaining 38 papers did 

impose some kind of structure or constraint. These were fairly evenly split between " macro 

scripts/structures" (18/38) – coarse -grained pedagogical designs that create learning situations 

within which the desired student interactions occur (cf. Dillenbourg & Tchounikine, 2007) – and 

an overlapping set of " micro scripts/structures" (25/38), which scaffold the interaction itself 

through devices such as sentence starters or question prompts (cf. Kobbe et al., 2007) . As noted 

under IQ2.4, these structures were often delivered socially (15/38, e.g., teacher instructions as in 

Garro Mena, 2024) but were sometimes also embedded in technology (15/38, e.g., user interface 

phases/transitions, as in Weber et al., 2025) . In 21 of those 38 studies, the constraints were 

additionally driven by LLM prompting (as in CodeTutor, Lyu et al., 2024) or pre -training of 

BERT -derived models, carried out by teachers and/or researchers. WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 22 

Beyond the micro/macro distinction, our inductive analysis of the HAIC/HI interactions 

reported in the reviewed studies identifies three recurrent, sometimes overlapping collaboration 

structures, sometimes purposefully imposed by the system, teachers, or r esearchers – but 

sometimes emerging spontaneously (see Figure 4): 

1. "AI creates/answers, humans refine" (46/62 papers) : Students delegate tasks or pose 

questions to the AI, then assess the AI -generated artefacts or answers, deciding whether 

further refinement is needed and engaging in multiple cycles of human feedback and AI 

refinement, either by modifying outputs themsel ves or by issuing additional requests to the 

AI. In three of the studies , students make iteratively refined requests to the AI (all three 

cases involving image generation) without making their own modificat ions to what the AI 

generates (Cao et al., 2025; Han et al., 2024; P. -Y. Lin et al., 2024) . Regarding the cyclic 

nature of these interactions, Hou et al. (2025) is the sole case in which students request AI 

assistance only once without subsequent engagement. In all other papers using this 

structure, students actively refine AI -generated content across multiple human -AI cycles 

of engagement. This structure maps mos t directly to the "assistant" mode of AI contribution 

described above (see IQ2.3). 

2. "Humans create, AI assesses" (18/62 papers) : Students carry out a learning task, typically 

producing an artefact such as a document or drawing, and at various points may request 

AI assessment and feedback. That feedback may be structured by a pedagogical 

framework (akin to a micro structure) or con strained loosely, or not at all, e.g., through 

LLM prompting. Students then decide how to incorporate it and may engage in further 

cycles of human refinement and AI feedback. Feedback types include direct performa nce 

assessment (e.g., Cosentino et al., 2025; Song et al., 2022) , suggestions for improving WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 23 

student proposals (e.g., Y. Fan et al., 2025; Min et al., 2025) , and scaffolding for 

reflection (e.g., Kumar, Xiao, et al., 2024; Parker et al., 2025) . Aslan et al. (2024) and 

Cosentino et al. (2025) are the only two papers in which students receive AI feedback just 

once, without engaging in additional interaction cycles. This structure maps to the 

"coach" mode of AI contribution (see IQ2.3). 

3. "AI participation in human collaboration" (7/62 papers) : Students collaborate through 

computer support (e.g., a chat), and the AI monitors that collaboration, intervening in 

three ways: ( a) providing an assessment of the ongoing human collaboration (Cai et al., 

2024; Sankaranarayanan et al., 2020) – for example, a chatbot detecting unequal 

participation and suggesting more opportunities for less -active students (Cai et al., 2024) ;

(b) answering a question raised by a participating student (Cai et al., 2024) , potentially 

triggering a shift toward structure #2; or ( c) playing the role of another team member (5 

papers) – for instance, an LLM -based chatbot prompted to act as a student in a group 

discussion forming part of a pyramid or snowball collaborative learning macro structure 

(Gutiérrez -Ferré et al., 2024) . Depending on the nature of AI’s interjections, this structure 

relates to either the "coach" or "teammate" modes of AI contribution (see IQ2.3). 

Figure 4 WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 24 

Basic collaboration structures emerging from the analysis of N=62 HAIC/HI for learning 

studies: 1) AI creates, humans refine (top -left); 2) Human creates, AI assesses (top -right); 3) AI 

participation in human collaboration (bottom). 

Beyond these collaboration structures, a key concern in recent literature is the tension 

among human control vs. AI automation, and agency (IQ3.2) which has implications for the 

reliability, safety, and trustworthiness of human -centered AI (HCAI) approaches (Shneiderman, 

2020) . These tensions are well -recognized in AIED (see, e.g., Cukurova, 2025; Darvishi et al., 

2024; Holstein et al., 2020; Molenaar, 2022 for recent examples) since certain distributions of WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 25 

control and automation between humans and AI can produce significant learning problems such 

as over -reliance (Zhai et al., 2024) or "metacognitive laziness" (Y. Fan et al., 2025) . Regarding 

human vs. AI control , only in Mlynář (2024) do students exercise full control over the AI tool, as 

they are the ones actually building the machine learning model. Gyasi (2025) presents another 

notable case, allowing students to change the AI's "mode of contribution" (see IQ2.3) by switching 

between "teammate" and "assistant". In all other papers, students either exert no control at all over 

the AI tool (21/62) or can steer its pre -configured behavior, typically through some kind of 

prompting (39/62). As our analysis shows, pedagogical control over the AI's behavior (through 

system constraints and/or prompts) is typically exercised by teachers or researchers rather than by 

studen ts. Consistent with this low level of human control, AI automation (the extent to which the 

AI carries out its tasks without human intervention) is high in 36 of 62 papers. Three situations 

account for most of these cases: (1) "Human creates, AI assesses" instances where the AI delivers 

feedback without additional human input (15 studies; e.g., Darvishi et al., 2024 for peer feedback; 

Y. Zhang et al., 2026 for writing tasks) ; (2) "AI creates, humans refine" instances where students 

do not help refine the AI's initial artefact (14 papers; e.g., Akçapınar & Sidan, 2024 for software 

development; Goel et al., 2023 for persona creation) ; and (3) all seven "AI participation in human 

collaboration" studies, where the AI monitors human -human interaction without receiving 

additional instructions during the activity. In 25 other papers, automation is lower because the AI 

requires ongoing huma n input (typically, additional prompts) to refine and complete its task. Aslan 

et al. (2024) stands out as a case of very low automation, with the AI apparently controlled and 

monitored continuously by an instructor. 

Finally, student agency in HAIC/HI, defined as "the capacity for students to actively shape 

their learning experiences, make responsible decisions, and control their educational journey" WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 26 

(Darvishi et al., 2024, p. 2) , is explicitly examined in only one of the 62 reviewed studies (Darvishi 

et al., 2024) . In 56 of 62 papers, however, students appear to retain a meaningful degree of agency, 

having the final say on how to act on AI -generated feedback, artefacts, or suggestions. Two 

exceptions stand out: in Gual -Ortí et al. (2025) , students actively complain about reduced control 

over final outcomes and difficulties editing AI -generated artefacts; and in Da S. Soares et al. 

(2019) , where AI mediates the student interaction with learning materials and students cannot opt 

out of AI outputs during the learning activity. 

RQ4: Design Knowledge – Recommendations, Research Gaps and Future Research Paths 

Regarding design guidelines and recommendations about HAIC/HI extracted from the 

revised papers (IQ4.1), our inductive analysis revealed several recurring themes. One expected 

theme in a field centered on collaboration is the quest for a balanced approach towards the roles 

and affordances of both human and AI actors (7 papers). Many related recommendations take a 

decidedly humanistic perspective, stressing that AI cannot and should not substitute the learner 

(or instructor) (12 papers). Accordingly, multipl e works reference the need for awareness, 

autonomy, human oversight, and agency (10 papers), calling for humans to monitor and 

intervene on AI outputs while preserving human leadership. Symmetry in roles and interactions 

may also reinforce "collaborative" relationships (Flavin et al., 2025) and find advantages in AI 

agents assuming various roles/personas , thus being perceived as realistic, competent, and 

dependable partners (Edwards et al., 2025) .

The reviewed papers offer a wide variety of more concrete design guidelines. These 

include using gamification to increase motivation (Aslan et al., 2024) , having humans double -

check AI outputs (“we encourage graduate students to reassess their SMART goals and action 

plans with their human mentors for personalized support” Chang et al., 2024, p. 14) and WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 27 

integrating interventions in wider contexts (e.g., going beyond coding to computational 

modeling, in Chen et al., 2024) . Other proposals include combining AI agents with self -

monitoring SRL (Self -Regulated Learning) checklists to reduce machine dominance and increase 

humanization of feedback (Darvishi et al., 2024) and leveraging AI misrecognition as a learning 

opportunity rather than merely an error (Song et al., 2022) . Since AI systems "are particularly 

good at recognizing errors or misunderstandings in students' tasks" (Weber et al., 2025, p. 669) ,

instructional and technology designers can use them to spot specific errors and provide targeted 

formative feedback at scale. One study proposed minimizing interaction effort for learners with 

disabilities (Da S. Soares et al., 2019) . Others recommend multiple feedback sources 

"comprising qualitative [peer feedback] from teachers, quantitative multimodal data analysis 

recognized by AI, and professional knowledge provided by experts" (J. Yu et al., 2025, p. 590) .

Y. Fan et al. (2025) caution about short - vs. long -term trade -offs : AI agents "can significantly 

improve short -term task performance, but they may not boost intrinsic motivation and 

knowledge gain and transfer" (p.490). Several authors also address ethical concerns : trust, 

transparency, and bias (8 papers). There is also an important strand of papers highlighting the 

need for adaptivity and personalization (12 papers), rather than reliance on general -purpose 

chatbots. 

Beyond these general guidelines, many authors stress the importance of the interaction 

process and workflow (17 papers), including structuring and sequencing interactions 

(particularly, in inquiry -based, project -based, or problem -based learning) and attending to 

sequential scaffolding and the end -to -end learning process. A further set of works (10 papers) 

under lines the need to define specific roles or personas for AI agents that fit learning process 

needs and promote critical thinking (e.g., Urban et al., 2024) .WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 28 

Turning to the human side of HAIC/HI, several works identify desired properties of 

human learners in (human -AI) collaborative contexts. A number of them emphasize developing 

critical thinking capabilities (12 papers) and creativity (4 papers), not only as 21st -century skills, 

but also as instruments for a balanced partnership that avoids over -reliance on AI (7 papers). 

Metacognitive strategies (8 papers) are similarly recommended, as metacognition and self - and 

social -regulation can both be triggered by human -AI interaction and serve as a buffer against 

imbalanced dependency. These learner -centric qualities are complemented by engagement in 

reflection (in - and on -action, cf. Schön, 2013) (10 papers) and using misrecognitions or failures 

as learning opportunities (Song et al., 2022) . Authors also stress the need for AI literacy ,

including prompting skills (6 papers) and broader understanding of AI capabilities and 

limitations (12 papers). Other works call for aligning HAIC/HI interventions with overall 

curriculum (e.g., Hwang et al., 2025) and learning objectives (e.g., Patra et al., 2024) (9 papers), 

or for creating a community of all related stakeholders , e.g., educators, researchers, and 

developers (Alier et al., 2025) .

Worth highlighting on its own is Bosch et al. 's (2025) work, noted above as a rare case of 

genuine "co -learning", in which both human and AI learn through interaction with each other and 

the environment. The authors provide recommendations for researchers aiming to promote such 

co -learning , including: carefully designing the AI's knowledge of task context, responsibilities, 

and others' roles; enabling in -action learning; encouraging learners to think critically and reflect 

on assumptions; making AI systems transparent through self -explanati on and clarification -

seeking; and ensuring symmetry of communication. 

Regarding research gaps and the future research agenda (IQ4.2), 32 of the 62 reviewed 

papers call for better understanding of HAIC/HI implications for human learning (e.g., Bosch et WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 29 

al., 2025; Darvishi et al., 2024; Lee et al., 2025; Sengewald & Tremmel, 2024; Tang et al., 

2024) , particularly through longer -term studies (e.g., Quan et al., 2024; Rasnayaka et al., 2024) .

This is consistent with our analysis of the interventions in IQ1.8 and with broader AIED 

literature (e.g., Chiu, 2024; Weidlich et al., 2025) . Eleven papers flag negative risks deserving 

further investigation: privacy and security (Adorni & Grosso, 2025) , ethical impacts (Cai et al., 

2024; Nguyen, Ilesanmi, et al., 2024; Rossato et al., 2024; Weber et al., 2025) , trustworthiness 

(Cosentino et al., 2025; Figoli et al., 2022) , over -reliance (Y. Fan et al., 2025) , and cognitive 

overload (Kumar, Musabirov, et al., 2024) . Notably, only 5 studies (Kim et al., 2024; Lee et al., 

2025; Sankaranarayanan et al., 2020; Tang et al., 2024; E. Yu, 2023) explicitly identify HAIC/HI 

structures and their associated interactions as a primary target for future research, reinforcing 

the conclusion from IQ2.4 that the collaborative dimension of HAIC/HI remains peripheral to 

most reviewed works. 

Discussion 

Implications of the Review 

Our analysis of 62 empirical studies on HAIC/HI for student learning reflects an 

emerging technology -oriented field : the prevalence of case studies, one -shot interventions, 

exploratory designs, and freeform AI use, all point to this state of flux. It thus remains premature 

to affirm the differential benefits of HAIC/HI approaches or particular collaboration structures 

for learning (cf. Yan, Greiff, et al., 2025 on the distinction between supporting learning and 

enhancing performance) . Compounding this is a persistent definitional void: what counts as 

HAIC/HI remains unclear, and terms like "co -creation" or "teammate" are used loosely, even 

when AI acts as a mere tool to which tasks are offloaded. Whether "collaboration" is accurate or 

simply metaphorical – or should be abandoned altogether (see Sarkar, 2023) – remains WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 30 

debatable, given the typical disparity in human and AI goals and the fact that, in the 

overwhelming majority of cases, AIs do not learn (see Bosch et al., 2025 for an exception) .

"Hybrid intelligence" is therefore more literally precise, focusing less on the interaction and 

relationships between humans and AIs, and more on the overall phenomenon of composing 

different forms of intelligence. 

Beyond the gaps identified in the reviewed papers themselves (see IQ4.2), our own 

assessment of the field points to several priorities for a future research agenda :

1. More detailed descriptions of human -AI interactions : as established in (CS)CL 

research (e.g., Dillenbourg et al., 1996; Stahl, 2006) , granular accounts of 

"collaboration" are essential for understanding learning phenomena in these new 

settings. 

2. Exploration of more complex collaboration structures : the structures surfaced in 

this review are relatively primitive (see IQ3.1). Emerging theoretical and 

empirical work is starting to identify more sophisticated micro - and macro -level 

HAIC/HI structures (e.g., Maya, 2024; Prieto et al., 2023) , but empirical testing 

and comparison (against each other or against freeform interaction) remains 

lacking. 

3. More longitudinal studies : moving beyond one -shot interventions is necessary to 

understand HAIC/HI as a potentially distinct form of learning, to rule out "novelty 

effects", and to examine both its benefits and unwanted side -effects (such as 

“metacognitive laziness” in Y. Fan et al., 2025) .

4. More rigorous evaluation of learning gains and learner skills , given that 

assessing the effects of interventions on learning (not merely artifact quality or WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 31 

task efficiency), despite being the ostensible goal of the field, remains 

comparatively rare (see IQ1.9 above; and Yan, Greiff, et al., 2025 for a broader 

discussion in the context of GenAI in education) .

The next subsection elaborates further implications concerning HAIC/HI structures and 

the design knowledge (technological and pedagogical) that this review yields, which represents 

our central focus in this paper. 

Where Is the Structure? Towards HAIC/HI for Learning Design Knowledge 

We began this SLR hoping to synthesize empirically backed design knowledge in the 

vein of Alexander's design patterns (recurrent problems in HAIC/HI for learning and their core 

solutions), themselves organized into pattern languages (Alexander et al., 1977) . However, the 

lack of repetition in elicited structures (beyond the simple ones noted in IQ3.1) and the relative 

scarcity of studies comparing interventions' effects on learning force us to conclude it is too early 

for such formalization of design knowledge in the area of HAIC/HI for learning. 

The three inductively identified collaboration structures in IQ3.1 could serve as pattern 

seeds , and relate to structures found in broader (i.e., not for learning) HAIC/HI literature. For 

instance, Wiethof and Bittner 's (2021) "Decision Support" pattern (where the human provides 

initial input and the AI responds with a recommendation or explanation ) resembles our "humans 

create, AI assesses" structure. Their "Exploration" pattern, where "the human gives implicit or 

explicit feedback on the returned results," resembles our "AI creates/answers, humans refine" 

structure. Notably, their "Creation" pattern, in which human and AI learning processes occur 

simultaneously and inseparably, did not appear in any of our reviewed papers. 

Gomez et al. 's (2025) more recent review on HAIC/HI for decision -making identifies 

seven "interaction patterns", all of which involve the AI proposing an artifact to the human with WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 32 

varying degrees of proactivity. Some patterns (e.g., AI -guided dialogic user engagement, user -

guided interactive adjustment) allow human feedback to refine AI proposals, but none suggests 

AI providing feedback on something the human previously developed. The authors themselves 

acknowledge the scarcity of "continuous user interaction scenarios, where user input is sustained 

and can receive AI feedback at any given moment". Our "Human creates, AI assesses" structure ,

however, may be more natural in education (where feedback is central to learning) than it is in 

decision support contexts. 

To move toward more formalized design knowledge about HAIC/HI for learning, we can 

also draw from non -empirical sources in education and educational technology. For reusable 

macro -structures, well -established collaboration flow patterns from human -to -human 

collaborative learning offer a starting point: Lee et al. (2025) and Gutierrez -Ferré et al. (2024) ,

for example, adapt the Jigsaw and Pyramid patterns (respectively) by introducing AI agents into 

them. Project -based learning literature similarly provides pedagogically grounded phase 

sequences that can be adapted for HAIC/HI scenarios (e.g., Fischer & Lanquillon, 2024; Hou et 

al., 2025) .

Beyond AI "modes of contribution" (IQ2.3, cf. Cui & Yasseri, 2024) – such as assistant, 

coach, or teammate – the rarely -encountered "peer/equal" role, in which AI mimics a fellow 

student with a comparable knowledge level, merits deeper exploration. Adjacent literature 

reviews identify overlapping recurrent roles : learning partner (Deng & Yu, 2023) , motivator, 

peer/co -learner (Han et al., 2025) – all of which can be repurposed in a way that is pedagogically 

sound. Sharples (2023) proposes more specific AI functions for learning conversations: 

possibility engine, Socratic opponent, collaboration coach… categories that partly overlap our 

empirically -sourced ones. Other emerging sources describe pedagogical roles for GenAI in WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 33 

adaptive simulations (Mollick et al., 2024) , or offer reusable implementations of such roles 

(Mollick & Mollick, 2023) , though formal evaluations of effectiveness remain scarce. At the 

micro -level (e.g., sentence openers, question prompts), LLMs' natural -language programmability 

means existing structures (e.g., social or epistemic scripts, see King, 2007; O’Donnell & 

Dansereau, 1992; Weinberger et al., 2005) can be directly incorporated into prompts in LLM -

based HAIC/HI systems .

The paper's title question (" where is the structure?") also points to how structures are 

implemented. Our synthesis (IQ2.4, IQ3.1) reveals a majority of studies relying on socially -

implemented structures, such as teacher instructions. This approach is flexible and low -cost but 

unreliable, depending on teacher capacity and orchestration load, which is often high (see 

Dillenbourg, 2013) . Embedding structures into the technological interface (e.g., as UI steps or 

selectable prompts) is more reliable. LLMs introduce a "middle path": more flexible than hard -

coded UI structures, though not guaranteed to produce the "intended interactions" (cf. 

Dillenbourg & Tchounikine, 2007) , and potentially combinable with either of the other two 

implementation modes. 

A related question is " when is the structure implemented?" Some works pre -set HAIC/HI 

structures rigidly at technology -design time; others, like Alier et al. 's (2025) LAMB framework, 

defer this to learning -design time; still others set the structure/constraints at enactment time 

through teacher instruction. Extending existing CSCL proposals, one could further hypothesize a 

"deploy -time" instantiation, where an abstract pedagogical design is customized for a particular 

classroom or student group (see Prieto et al., 2013) .

More work is needed to refine these proto -patterns into a coherent pattern language that 

supports researchers, designers, and educators in designing HAIC/HI learning experiences. WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 34 

Accordingly, more empirical research is also needed to quantify the relative effects (both 

intended and undesired) of different AI uses in learning (Y. Fan et al., 2025; Weidlich et al., 

2025; Yan, Pammer‐Schindler, et al., 2025) .

Limitations and Future Research 

The present SLR is not without limitations . Like any SLR, our query may have missed 

relevant synonyms, though our initial exploratory search (see "Methodology") sought to 

minimize this. A further limitation is the explosive growth of GenAI research. Our emphasis on 

manual reading and processing , chosen to enable deeper understanding of the nuances of 

collaboration/interaction processes described in the papers (vs. wider, semi -automated 

approaches using LLM technology, with their advantages and disadvantages, Scherbakov et al., 

2025; Tosi, 2025; Treviño & Arias -Carrión, 2025) made for a slower review and writeup. We 

therefore acknowledge that, by publication, some findings may already be outdated. That said, 

our unsystematic reading of more recent sources appears to confirm the general trends identified 

(definitional fuzziness, lack of interaction detail, failure to measure learning – see, e.g., Ong et 

al., 2026; F. Zhang et al., 2025) . Regular updates to the review (as performed in 2025 following 

our initial 2024 wave) would be valuable as this dynamic field evolves. A further methodological 

limitation is our de -emphasizing of deductive codebook work and inter -coder agreement 

measures in the qualitative synthesis of the analyzed papers. While this ref lects an interpretive 

stance on literature synthesis (where researchers, with their biases and backgrounds, serve as key 

research instruments, V. Braun & Clarke, 2006) it may reduce the perceived validity of our 

findings among more post -positivist researchers who favor quantitative measures of inter -

subjectivity. WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 35 

Another limitation of our findings stems from the comparatively thin descriptions of 

learner -AI interactions in many reviewed papers (see our research agenda above). This has 

constrained the richness of the HAIC/HI structures we could elicit from the empir ical literature. 

As the research community grows to appreciate the importance of low -level interaction details 

for learning outcomes (as was discovered in collaborative learning research, Dillenbourg, 1999) 

richer interaction descriptions may become standard practice. This shift will also influence study 

designs, which currently rely heavily on post -hoc student surveys. Eventually, greater 

instrumentation of HAIC/HI environments and high -detail interaction a nalyses (common in 

fields like CSCL, see Hmelo -Silver et al., 2013) may follow. 

Regarding future research , a priority should be convening groups of HAIC/HI (for 

learning) experts to engage in pattern synthesis, a practice well established in collaborative 

learning and learning design research (Baggetun et al., 2004; Goodyear, 2005) with the goal of 

deriving formal design patterns in the Alexandrian sense. Given the volume of recent work and 

likely tacit knowledge accumulating among researchers not yet codified in publications, formats 

such as Mor and colleagues’ "participatory pattern workshops" could be especially productive 

for building the design knowledge needed to support more effective HAIC/HI learning 

experiences (Mor et al., 2012; Mor & Winters, 2008) .

Conclusion 

Our systematic literature review of empirical HAIC/HI works to support learning reveals 

a research area in flux and explosive growth. Synthesis efforts like this paper or the 

abovementioned pattern synthesis may help "settle the dust" on murky questions ab out whether 

having learners collaborate with generative AI chatbots, agents, and other elements, is beneficial 

(and for what, and to what extent) beyond the obvious answer (it depends). They may also help WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 36 

us understand the ethical implications of AI’s use (e.g., the subsequent AI access gap, see 

Hammerschmidt). The current terminological fuzziness and definitional voids signal that several 

debates are overdue: whether "human -AI collaboration for learning" i s even the right term (cf. 

Sarkar), and whether "AI learning" should also be among our goals, as fields like human -AI 

teaming have embraced (Van Den Bosch et al., 2019) . These debates in turn reflect contrasting 

visions for this research area, and for educational technologies more broadly. A humanist view 

(still prevalent in most reviewed works, see IQ4.1 results) holds that human learning is the 

ultimate goal, learner agency is paramount, and AI, however agentic, remains a tool (e.g., 

Cukurova, 2025; Molenaar, 2022) . A post -humanist view seems to be slowly emerging, perhaps 

signaled by terms like "hybrid intelligence," in which AI learning and agency matter in their own 

right, and a new form of intelligence (and, hence, learning), which is not entirely human (or goes 

beyond humanity) emerges. According to this emerging view, learning and collaboration are 

produced through entanglements of humans, technologies, materials, representations, and 

discourses (Sheridan et al., 2020) . We look forward to participating in these debates and the 

interesting times (to quote the ancient Chinese curse) they may bring. 

Acknowledgements 

The present work has been supported by grants PID2023 -146692OB -C32, RYC2021 -

032273 -I, and RYC2022 -037806 -I, all financed by MCIN/ AEI/ 10.13039/501100011033. These 

grants have been co -funded by the European Union's ERDF, ESF+, and 

"NextGenerationEU/PRTR”. It has also been supported by the Regional Government of Castile 

and Leon and FEDER, under project grant VA176P23. 

Declaration of interest statement 

The authors report there are no competing interests to declare. WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 37 WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 38 

References 

Adorni, G., & Grosso, D. (2025). Speeding up design and making to reduce time -to -project and 

time -to -market: An AI -Enhanced approach in engineering education. AIxEDU: 2nd 

International Workshop on Artificial Intelligence Systems in Education , 3879 .

https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2503.16307 

Akata, Z., Balliet, D., De Rijke, M., Dignum, F., Dignum, V., Eiben, G., Fokkens, A., Grossi, D., 

Hindriks, K., Hoos, H., Hung, H., Jonker, C., Monz, C., Neerincx, M., Oliehoek, F., 

Prakken, H., Schlobach, S., Van Der Gaag, L., Van Harmelen, F., … Welling, M. (2020). 

A Research Agenda for Hybrid Intelligence: Augmenting Human Intellect With 

Collaborative, Adaptive, Responsible, and Explainable Artificial Intelligence. Computer ,

53 (8), 18 –28. https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2020.2996587 

Akçapınar, G., & Sidan, E. (2024). AI chatbots in programming education: Guiding success or 

encouraging plagiarism. Discover Artificial Intelligence , 4(1), 87. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s44163 -024 -00203 -7

Alexander, C., Ishikawa, S., Silverstein, M., Jacobson, M., King, I. F., & Angel, S. (1977). A

pattern language: Towns, buildings, construction . Oxford University Press. 

Alier, M., Pereira, J., García -Peñalvo, F. J., Casañ, M. J., & Cabré, J. (2025). LAMB: An open -

source software framework to create artificial intelligence assistants deployed and 

integrated into learning management systems. Computer Standards & Interfaces , 92 ,

103940. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csi.2024.103940 

Aslan, S., Durham, L. M., Alyuz, N., Okur, E., Sharma, S., Savur, C., & Nachman, L. (2024). 

Immersive multi -modal pedagogical conversational artificial intelligence for early WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 39 

childhood education: An exploratory case study in the wild. Computers and Education: 

Artificial Intelligence , 6, 100220. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2024.100220 

Baggetun, R., Rusman, E., & Poggi, C. (2004). Design Patterns For Collaborative Learning: 

From Practice To Theory And Back . 2493 –2498. 

Borup, M., Brown, N., Konrad, K., & Van Lente, H. (2006). The sociology of expectations in 

science and technology. Technology Analysis & Strategic Management , 18 (3 –4), 285 –

298. https://doi.org/10.1080/09537320600777002 

Bosch, K. van den, Zoelen, E. van, Schoonderwoerd, T., Solaki, A. A., Stigchel, B. V. der, & 

Akrum, I. (2025). Design and Effects of Co -Learning in Human -AI Teams. Journal of 

Artificial Intelligence Research , 82 , 1445 –1493. https://doi.org/10.1613/jair.1.16846 

Braun, M., Greve, M., & Gnewuch, U. (2023). The New Dream Team? A Review of Human -AI 

Collaboration Research From a Human Teamwork Perspective . International Conference 

on Information Systems (ICIS). 

Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in 

Psychology , 3(2), 77 –101. https://doi.org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa 

Cai, Z., Park, S., Nixon, N., & Doroudi, S. (2024). Advancing Knowledge Together: Integrating 

Large Language Model -based Conversational AI in Small Group Collaborative Learning. 

Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 –

9. https://doi.org/10.1145/3613905.3650868 

Cao, Y., Abdul Aziz, A., & Mohd Arshard, W. N. R. (2025). Stable diffusion in architectural 

design: Closing doors or opening new horizons? International Journal of Architectural 

Computing , 23 (2), 339 –357. https://doi.org/10.1177/14780771241270257 WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 40 

Chang, C. -N., Hui, J., Justus -Smith, C., & Wang, T. -W. (2024). Navigating STEM careers with 

AI mentors: A new IDP journey. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence , 7, 1461137. 

https://doi.org/10.3389/frai.2024.1461137 

Chen, J., Lu, X., Du, Y., Rejtig, M., Bagley, R., Horn, M., & Wilensky, U. (2024). Learning 

Agent -based Modeling with LLM Companions: Experiences of Novices and Experts 

Using ChatGPT & NetLogo Chat. Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human 

Factors in Computing Systems , 1 –18. https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642377 

Chiu, T. K. F. (2024). Future research recommendations for transforming higher education with 

generative AI. Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence , 6, 100197. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2023.100197 

Cosentino, G., Anton, J., Sharma, K., Gelsomini, M., Giannakos, M., & Abrahamson, D. (2025). 

Generative AI and multimodal data for educational feedback: Insights from embodied 

math learning. British Journal of Educational Technology , 56 (5), 1686 –1709. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.13587 

Cui, H., & Yasseri, T. (2024). AI -enhanced collective intelligence. Patterns , 5(11), 101074. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patter.2024.101074 

Cukurova, M. (2025). The interplay of learning, analytics and artificial intelligence in education: 

A vision for hybrid intelligence. British Journal of Educational Technology , 56 (2), 469 –

488. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.13514 

Cukurova, M. (2026). Agency as a system property in human —AI interaction in education. 

British Journal of Educational Technology , n/a (n/a). https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.70060 

Da S. Soares, M. I., De M.B. Oliveira, F. C., Muniz, P. H. G., & Do Nascimento, M. D. (2019). 

ANA: A virtual assistant that sees and hears to help tetraplegic online learning. 2019 WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 41 

IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference (FIE) , 1 –5. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/FIE43999.2019.9028558 

Darban, M. (2024). Navigating virtual teams in generative AI -led learning: The moderation of 

team perceived virtuality. Education and Information Technologies , 29 (17), 23225 –

23248. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639 -024 -12681 -4

Darvishi, A., Khosravi, H., Sadiq, S., Gašević, D., & Siemens, G. (2024). Impact of AI 

assistance on student agency. Computers & Education , 210 , 104967. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2023.104967 

Dellermann, D., Calma, A., Lipusch, N., Weber, T., Weigel, S., & Ebel, P. (2021). The future of 

human -AI collaboration: A taxonomy of design knowledge for hybrid intelligence systems 

(Version 1). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2105.03354 

Dellermann, D., Ebel, P., Söllner, M., & Leimeister, J. M. (2019). Hybrid Intelligence. Business 

& Information Systems Engineering , 61 (5), 637 –643. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12599 -

019 -00595 -2

Deng, X., & Yu, Z. (2023). A Meta -Analysis and Systematic Review of the Effect of Chatbot 

Technology Use in Sustainable Education. Sustainability , 15 (4), 2940. 

https://doi.org/10.3390/su15042940 

Dillenbourg, P. (1999). What do you mean by “Collaborative Learning”? In P. Dillenbourg 

(Ed.), Collaborative Learning. Cognitive and Computational Approaches (pp. 1 –19). 

Elsevier Science. 

Dillenbourg, P. (2013). Design for classroom orchestration. Computers and Education , 69 , 485 –

492. WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 42 

Dillenbourg, P., Baker, M., Blaye, A., & O’Malley, C. (1996). The evolution of research on 

collaborative learning. In Learning in Humans and Machine: Towards an 

interdisciplinary learning science (pp. 189 –211). Oxford: Elsevier. 

Dillenbourg, P., & Jermann, P. (2007). Designing Integrative Scripts. In F. Fischer, I. Kollar, H. 

Mandl, & J. M. Haake (Eds.), Scripting Computer -Supported Collaborative Learning 

(pp. 275 –301). Springer US. https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -0-387 -36949 -5_16 

Dillenbourg, P., & Tchounikine, P. (2007). Flexibility in macro -scripts for computer -supported 

collaborative learning. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning , 23 (1), 1 –13. 

Ding, Z., & Chiu, M. (2024). Can I Collaborate with You? An Investigation of Trust in 

Generative AI . Proceedings of the Association for Information Science and Technology ,

61 (1), 889 –891. https://doi.org/10.1002/pra2.1130 

Du Boulay, B., & Luckin, R. (2016). Modelling Human Teaching Tactics and Strategies for 

Tutoring Systems: 14 Years On. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in 

Education , 26 (1), 393 –404. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40593 -015 -0053 -0

Dutta, D., & Kannan Poyil, A. (2025). Leveraging artificial intelligence: The machine/human 

agentic impact on evolving practices in learning & development. Behaviour & 

Information Technology , 1 –21. https://doi.org/10.1080/0144929X.2025.2496722 

Edwards, J., Nguyen, A., Lämsä, J., Sobocinski, M., Whitehead, R., Dang, B., Roberts, A., & 

Järvelä, S. (2025). Human‐ AI collaboration: Designing artificial agents to facilitate 

socially shared regulation among learners. British Journal of Educational Technology ,

56 (2), 712 –733. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.13534 

Fan, G., Liu, D., Zhang, R., & Pan, L. (2025). The impact of AI -assisted pair programming on 

student motivation, programming anxiety, collaborative learning, and programming WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 43 

performance: A comparative study with traditional pair programming and individual 

approaches. International Journal of STEM Education , 12 (1), 16. 

https://doi.org/10.1186/s40594 -025 -00537 -3

Fan, Y., Tang, L., Le, H., Shen, K., Tan, S., Zhao, Y., Shen, Y., Li, X., & Gašević, D. (2025). 

Beware of metacognitive laziness: Effects of generative artificial intelligence on learning 

motivation, processes, and performance. British Journal of Educational Technology ,

56 (2), 489 –530. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.13544 

Figoli, F. A., Rampino, L., & Mattioli, F. (2022). AI IN THE DESIGN PROCESS: TRAINING 

THE HUMAN -AI COLLABORATION. Proceedings of the 24th International 

Conference on Engineering and Product Design Education (E&PDE 2022) .

INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON ENGINEERING AND PRODUCT DESIGN 

EDUCATION. https://doi.org/10.35199/EPDE.2022.61 

Fischer, M., & Lanquillon, C. (2024). Evaluation of Generative AI -Assisted Software Design 

and Engineering: A User -Centered Approach. In H. Degen & S. Ntoa (Eds.), Artificial 

Intelligence in HCI (Vol. 14734, pp. 31 –47). Springer Nature Switzerland. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-031 -60606 -9_3 

Flavin, E., Hwang, S., & Morales, M. (2025). “Let’s Ask the Robot!”: Epistemic Stance Between 

Teacher Candidates Toward AI in Mathematics Lesson Planning. Journal of Teacher 

Education , 76 (3), 262 –279. https://doi.org/10.1177/00224871251325079 

Fragiadakis, G., Diou, C., Kousiouris, G., & Nikolaidou, M. (2025). Evaluating Human -AI 

Collaboration: A Review and Methodological Framework (arXiv:2407.19098). arXiv. 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2407.19098 WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 44 

Garg, A., Nisumba Soodhani, K., & Rajendran, R. (2025). Enhancing data analysis and 

programming skills through structured prompt training: The impact of generative AI in 

engineering education. Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence , 8, 100380. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2025.100380 

Garro Mena, L. (2024). Optimizando el aprendizaje mediante IA: La eficacia de flujos de trabajo 

estructurados en la educación superior. REDU. Revista de Docencia Universitaria , 22 (2), 

105 –121. https://doi.org/10.4995/redu.2024.21989 

Goel, T., Shaer, O., Delcourt, C., Gu, Q., & Cooper, A. (2023). Preparing Future Designers for 

Human -AI Collaboration in Persona Creation. Proceedings of the 2nd Annual Meeting of 

the Symposium on Human -Computer Interaction for Work , 1 –14. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3596671.3598574 

Gomez, C., Cho, S. M., Ke, S., Huang, C. -M., & Unberath, M. (2025). Human -AI collaboration 

is not very collaborative yet: A taxonomy of interaction patterns in AI -assisted decision 

making from a systematic review. Frontiers in Computer Science , 6, 1521066. 

https://doi.org/10.3389/fcomp.2024.1521066 

Goodyear, P. (2005). Educational design and networked learning: Patterns, pattern languages and 

design practice. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology , 21 (1). 

https://doi.org/10.14742/ajet.1344 

Gual -Ortí, J., Martínez Moya, J. A., Amat, J., & Felip Miralles, F. (2025). The Future of Logo 

Design: Considering Generative AI -Assisted Designs. The International Journal of 

Visual Design , 19 (1), 109 –123. https://doi.org/10.18848/2325 -1581/CGP/v19i01/109 -123 

Gutiérrez -Ferré, A., Hernández -Leo, D., & Sánchez -Reina, J. R. (2024). Generative AI Chatbot 

in PyramidApp: Students’ Behaviors and Design Principles. In P. Santos, C. Álvarez, D. WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 45 

Hernández -Leo, M. Kobayashi, & G. Zurita (Eds.), Collaboration Technologies and 

Social Computing (Vol. 14890, pp. 248 –256). Springer Nature Switzerland. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-031 -67998 -8_19 

Gyasi, J. F., Zheng, L., Love, S. F., & Boateng, F. O. (2025). The effects of three different 

approaches to human -AI collaboration on online collaborative learning. Educational 

Technology & Society , 28 (2). https://doi.org/10.30191/ETS.202504_28(2).TP07 

Han, Y., Hong, S., Li, Z., & Lim, C. (2025). Defining and Classifying the Roles of Intelligent 

Learning Companion Systems: A Scoping Review of the Literature. TechTrends , 69 (3), 

567 –581. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11528 -025 -01058 -0

Han, Y., Qiu, Z., Cheng, J., & Lc, R. (2024). When Teams Embrace AI: Human Collaboration 

Strategies in Generative Prompting in a Creative Design Task. Proceedings of the CHI 

Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 –14. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642133 

Hemmer, P., Schemmer, M., Vössing, M., & Kühl, N. (2021). Human -AI Complementarity in 

Hybrid Intelligence Systems: A Structured Literature Review . Pacific Asia Conference on 

Information Systems (PACIS). 

Hernández Leo, D., Asensio -Pérez, J. I., & Dimitriadis, Y. (2005). Computational representation 

of collaborative learning flow patterns using IMS learning design. Journal of Educational 

Technology & Society 2005; 8 (4): 75 -89 .

Hmelo -Silver, C., Chinn, C., Chan, C., & O’Donnell, A. (Eds.). (2013). The International 

Handbook of Collaborative Learning (0 ed.). Routledge. 

https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203837290 WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 46 

Holstein, K., Aleven, V., & Rummel, N. (2020). A Conceptual Framework for Human –AI 

Hybrid Adaptivity in Education. In I. I. Bittencourt, M. Cukurova, K. Muldner, R. 

Luckin, & E. Millán (Eds.), Artificial Intelligence in Education (Vol. 12163, pp. 240 –

254). Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-030 -52237 -7_20 

Hou, C., Zhu, G., Sudarshan, V., Lim, F. S., & Ong, Y. S. (2025). Measuring undergraduate 

students’ reliance on Generative AI during problem -solving: Scale development and 

validation. Computers & Education , 234 , 105329. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2025.105329 

Hussein, R., Zhang, Z., Amarante, P., Hancock, N., Orduna, P., & Rodriguez -Gil, L. (2024). 

Integrating Personalized AI -Assisted Instruction Into Remote Laboratories: Enhancing 

Engineering Education with OpenAI’s GPT Models. 2024 IEEE Frontiers in Education 

Conference (FIE) , 1 –7. https://doi.org/10.1109/FIE61694.2024.10892918 

Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the Wild . The MIT Press. 

https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/1881.001.0001 

Hwang, Y., Shin, D., & Lee, J. H. (2025). Who owns AI -generated artwork? Revisiting the work 

of generative AI based on human -AI co -creation. Telematics and Informatics , 98 ,

102266. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tele.2025.102266 

Järvelä, S., Nguyen, A., & Hadwin, A. (2023). Human and artificial intelligence collaboration for 

socially shared regulation in learning. British Journal of Educational Technology , 54 (5), 

1057 –1076. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.13325 

Järvelä, S., Zhao, G., Nguyen, A., & Chen, H. (2025). Hybrid intelligence: Human –AI 

coevolution and learning. British Journal of Educational Technology , 56 (2), 455 –468. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.13560 WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 47 

Jermann, P., & Dillenbourg, P. (2003). Elaborating New Arguments Through a CSCL Script. In 

J. Andriessen, M. Baker, & D. Suthers (Eds.), Arguing to Learn (pp. 205 –226). Springer 

Netherlands. https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -94 -017 -0781 -7_8 

Johnson, D. W., & Johnson, R. T. (2009). An Educational Psychology Success Story: Social 

Interdependence Theory and Cooperative Learning. Educational Researcher , 38 (5), 365 –

379. https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X09339057 

Kamar, E. (2016). Directions in hybrid intelligence: Complementing AI systems with human 

intelligence . 4070 –4073. 

Kazemitabaar, M., Ye, R., Wang, X., Henley, A. Z., Denny, P., Craig, M., & Grossman, T. 

(2024). CodeAid: Evaluating a Classroom Deployment of an LLM -based Programming 

Assistant that Balances Student and Educator Needs. Proceedings of the CHI Conference 

on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 –20. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642773 

Kim, J., Ham, Y., & Lee, S. -S. (2024). Differences in student -AI interaction process on a 

drawing task: Focusing on students’ attitude towards AI and the level of drawing skills. 

Australasian Journal of Educational Technology . https://doi.org/10.14742/ajet.8859 

King, A. (2007). Scripting Collaborative Learning Processes: A Cognitive Perspective. In F. 

Fischer, I. Kollar, H. Mandl, & J. M. Haake (Eds.), Scripting Computer -Supported 

Collaborative Learning (pp. 13 –37). Springer US. https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -0-387 -

36949 -5_2 

Kobbe, L., Weinberger, A., Dillenbourg, P., Harrer, A., Hämäläinen, R., Häkkinen, P., & 

Fischer, F. (2007). Specifying computer -supported collaboration scripts. International WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 48 

Journal of Computer -Supported Collaborative Learning , 2(2 –3), 211 –224. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s11412 -007 -9014 -4

Kollar, I., Fischer, F., & Hesse, F. W. (2006). Collaboration Scripts – A Conceptual Analysis. 

Educational Psychology Review , 18 (2), 159 –185. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10648 -006 -

9007 -2

Kovari, A. (2025). A systematic review of AI -powered collaborative learning in higher 

education: Trends and outcomes from the last decade. Social Sciences & Humanities 

Open , 11 , 101335. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssaho.2025.101335 

Kumar, H., Musabirov, I., Reza, M., Shi, J., Wang, X., Williams, J. J., Kuzminykh, A., & Liut, 

M. (2024). Guiding Students in Using LLMs in Supported Learning Environments: 

Effects on Interaction Dynamics, Learner Performance, Confidence, and Trust. 

Proceedings of the ACM on Human -Computer Interaction , 8(CSCW2), 1 –30. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3687038 

Kumar, H., Xiao, R., Lawson, B., Musabirov, I., Shi, J., Wang, X., Luo, H., Williams, J. J., 

Rafferty, A. N., Stamper, J., & Liut, M. (2024). Supporting Self -Reflection at Scale with 

Large Language Models: Insights from Randomized Field Experiments in Clas srooms. 

Proceedings of the Eleventh ACM Conference on Learning @ Scale , 86 –97. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3657604.3662042 

Labadze, L., Grigolia, M., & Machaidze, L. (2023). Role of AI chatbots in education: Systematic 

literature review. International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education ,

20 (1), 56. https://doi.org/10.1186/s41239 -023 -00426 -1

Lee, G. -G., Mun, S., Shin, M. -K., & Zhai, X. (2025). Collaborative Learning with Artificial 

Intelligence Speakers: Pre -service Elementary Science Teachers’ Responses to the WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 49 

Prototype. Science & Education , 34 (2), 847 –875. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11191 -024 -

00526 -y

Lin, C. -H., Zhou, K., Li, L., & Sun, L. (2025). Integrating generative AI into digital multimodal 

composition: A study of multicultural second -language classrooms. Computers and 

Composition , 75 , 102895. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compcom.2024.102895 

Lin, P. -Y., Andersen, K., Schmidt, R., Schoenmakers, S., Hofmeyer, H., Pauwels, P., & 

Ijsselsteijn, W. (2024). Text -to -Image AI as a Catalyst for Semantic Convergence in 

Creative Collaborations. Designing Interactive Systems Conference , 2753 –2767. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3643834.3661543 

Liu, H., Zhang, X., Zhou, J., Shou, Y., Yin, Y., & Chai, C. (2025). Cognitive styles and design 

performances in conceptual design collaboration with GenAI. International Journal of 

Technology and Design Education , 35 (3), 1169 –1202. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10798 -

024 -09937 -y

Lyu, W., Wang, Y., Chung, T. (Rachel), Sun, Y., & Zhang, Y. (2024). Evaluating the 

Effectiveness of LLMs in Introductory Computer Science Education: A Semester -Long 

Field Study. Proceedings of the Eleventh ACM Conference on Learning @ Scale , 63 –74. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3657604.3662036 

Maya, H. R. R. (2024, August). Enhancing Academic Creativity: Co -Creation and Artificial 

Intelligence . The 10th World Congress on Electrical Engineering and Computer Systems 

and Science. https://doi.org/10.11159/cist24.178 

Miles, M. B., & Huberman, M. (1994). Qualitative Data Analysis: An Expanded Sourcebook .

Sage Publications. WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 50 

Min, T., Lee, B., & Jho, H. (2025). Integrating generative artificial intelligence in the design of 

scientific inquiry for middle school students. Education and Information Technologies ,

30 (11), 15329 –15360. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639 -025 -13410 -1

Mittal, U., Sai, S., Chamola, V., & Sangwan, D. (2024). A Comprehensive Review on 

Generative AI for Education. IEEE Access , 12 , 142733 –142759. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3468368 

Mlynář, J., Depeursinge, A., Prior, J. O., Schaer, R., Martroye De Joly, A., & Evéquoz, F. 

(2024). Making sense of radiomics: Insights on human –AI collaboration in medical 

interaction from an observational user study. Frontiers in Communication , 8, 1234987. 

https://doi.org/10.3389/fcomm.2023.1234987 

Molenaar, I. (2022). Towards hybrid HUMAN ‐AI learning technologies. European Journal of 

Education , 57 (4), 632 –645. https://doi.org/10.1111/ejed.12527 

Mollick, E., & Mollick, L. (2023). Assigning AI: Seven Approaches for Students, with Prompts 

(Version 1). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2306.10052 

Mollick, E., Mollick, L., Bach, N., Ciccarelli, L., Przystanski, B., & Ravipinto, D. (2024). AI 

Agents and Education: Simulated Practice at Scale (Version 1). arXiv. 

https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2407.12796 

Mor, Y., Warburton, S., & Winters, N. (2012). Participatory pattern workshops: A methodology 

for open learning design inquiry. Research in Learning Technology , 20 (sup1), 19197. 

https://doi.org/10.3402/rlt.v20i0.19197 

Mor, Y., & Winters, N. (2008). Participatory design in open education: A workshop model for 

developing a pattern language. Journal of Interactive Media in Education , 2008 (1), 12. 

https://doi.org/10.5334/2008 -13 WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 51 

Nguyen, A., Hong, Y., Dang, B., & Huang, X. (2024). Human -AI collaboration patterns in AI -

assisted academic writing. Studies in Higher Education , 49 (5), 847 –864. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/03075079.2024.2323593 

Nguyen, A., Ilesanmi, F., Dang, B., Vuorenmaa, E., & Järvelä, S. (2024). Hybrid Intelligence in 

Academic Writing: Examining Self -Regulated Learning Patterns in an AI -Assisted 

Writing Task. In F. Lorig, J. Tucker, A. Dahlgren Lindström, F. Dignum, P. 

Muruka nnaiah, A. Theodorou, & P. Yolum (Eds.), HHAI 2024: Hybrid Human AI 

Systems for the Social Good (pp. 241 –254). IOS Press. 

https://doi.org/10.3233/FAIA240198 

Noroozi, O., Soleimani, S., Farrokhnia, M., & Banihashem, S. K. (2024). Generative AI in 

Education: Pedagogical, Theoretical, and Methodological Perspectives. International 

Journal of Technology in Education , 7(3), 373 –385. https://doi.org/10.46328/ijte.845 

O’Donnell, A. M., & Dansereau, D. F. (1992). Scripted Cooperation in Student Dyads: A 

Method for Analyzing and Enhancing. In Interaction in Cooperative Groups: The 

Theoretical Anatomy of Group Learning (pp. 120 –142). Cambridge University Press. 

(Original work published Rachel Hertz -Lazarowitz, Norman Miller) 

O’Donnell, A. M., & Hmelo -Silver, C. E. (2013). Introduction: What is collaborative learning?: 

An overview. In The international handbook of collaborative learning (pp. 1 –15). 

Routledge. 

Okonkwo, C. W., & Ade -Ibijola, A. (2021). Chatbots applications in education: A systematic 

review. Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence , 2, 100033. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2021.100033 WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 52 

Ong, K. T., Seo, J., Kim, H., Kim, J., Kim, J., Kim, S., Yeo, J., & Choi, E. Y. (2026). Success 

and failure of human –AI collaboration in clinical reasoning: An experimental study on 

challenging real -world cases. International Journal of Medical Informatics , 211 , 106342. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2026.106342 

Page, M. J., McKenzie, J. E., Bossuyt, P. M., Boutron, I., Hoffmann, T. C., Mulrow, C. D., 

Shamseer, L., Tetzlaff, J. M., Akl, E. A., Brennan, S. E., Chou, R., Glanville, J., 

Grimshaw, J. M., Hróbjartsson, A., Lalu, M. M., Li, T., Loder, E. W., Mayo -Wilson , E., 

McDonald, S., … Moher, D. (2021). The PRISMA 2020 statement: An updated guideline 

for reporting systematic reviews. BMJ , n71. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.n71 

Parker, J. L., Richard, V. M., Acabá, A., Escoffier, S., Flaherty, S., Jablonka, S., & Becker, K. P. 

(2025). Negotiating Meaning with Machines: AI’s Role in Doctoral Writing Pedagogy. 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education , 35 (3), 1218 –1238. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s40593 -024 -00425 -x

Patra, L., Kumari, M., & Gopalapillai, R. (2024). Enhancing Artificial Intelligence and Machine 

Learning Understanding Through EnVision: A Virtual Reality Approach. 2024 First 

International Conference on Pioneering Developments in Computer Science &amp; 

Digital Technologies (IC2SDT) , 516 –521. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/IC2SDT62152.2024.10696360 

Pileggi, S. F. (2024). Ontology in Hybrid Intelligence: A Concise Literature Review. Future 

Internet , 16 (8), 268. https://doi.org/10.3390/fi16080268 

Prieto, L. P., Asensio -Perez, J. I., Munoz -Cristobal, J. A., Dimitriadis, Y. A., Jorrin -Abellan, I. 

M., & Gomez -Sanchez, E. (2013). Enabling Teachers to Deploy CSCL Designs across WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 53 

Distributed Learning Environments. IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies , 6(4), 

324 –336. https://doi.org/10.1109/TLT.2013.22 

Prieto, L. P., Pishtari, G., Dimitriadis, Y., Rodríguez -Triana, M. J., Ley, T., & Odriozola -

González, P. (2023). Single -case learning analytics: Feasibility of a human -centered 

analytics approach to support doctoral education. JUCS - Journal of Universal Computer 

Science , 29 (9), 1033 –1068. https://doi.org/10.3897/jucs.94067 

Quan, G., Wang, Y., Hu, X., & Shaer, O. (2024). Exploring the Impact of Human -AI 

Collaboration on College Students’ Tangible Creation: Building Poetic Scenes with 

LEGO Bricks. Joint Proceedings of the ACM IUI Workshops , 3660 , 1 –14. https://ceur -

ws.org/Vol -3660/paper9.pdf 

Rasnayaka, S., Wang, G., Shariffdeen, R., & Iyer, G. N. (2024). An Empirical Study on Usage 

and Perceptions of LLMs in a Software Engineering Project. Proceedings of the 1st 

International Workshop on Large Language Models for Code , 111 –118. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3643795.3648379 

Rip, A., & Voß, J. -P. (2013). Umbrella terms as mediators in the governance of emerging 

science and technology . https://doi.org/10.14279/DEPOSITONCE -4480 

Rokkones, R. K., & Giannakos, M. (2025). Toward hybrid teaching intelligence: Investigating 

the potential of teacher –AI collaboration using large language models. Behaviour & 

Information Technology , 1 –19. https://doi.org/10.1080/0144929X.2025.2564368 

Rossato, B., Tenuta, L., Testa, S., & Cappellieri, A. (2024). Beyond the Machine: Human -AI 

Collaboration in Jewelry Design. HEAd’24, 10th International Conference on Higher 

Education Advances . International Conference on Higher Education Advances. 

https://doi.org/10.4995/HEAd24.2024.17262 WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 54 

Sankaranarayanan, S., Kandimalla, S. R., Hasan, S., An, H., Bogart, C., Murray, R. C., Hilton, 

M., Sakr, M., & Rosé, C. (2020). Agent -in -the -Loop: Conversational Agent Support in 

Service of Reflection for Learning During Collaborative Programming. In I. I. 

Bittencourt, M. Cukurova, K. Muldner, R. Luckin, & E. Millán (Eds.), Artificial 

Intelligence in Education. AIED 2020 (Vol. 12164, pp. 273 –278). Springer International 

Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-030 -52240 -7

Sarkar, A. (2023). Enough With “Human -AI Collaboration.” Extended Abstracts of the 2023 

CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 –8. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3544549.3582735 

Scherbakov, D., Hubig, N., Jansari, V., Bakumenko, A., & Lenert, L. A. (2025). The emergence 

of large language models as tools in literature reviews: A large language model -assisted 

systematic review. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association , 32 (6), 

1071 –1086. https://doi.org/10.1093/jamia/ocaf063 

Schön, D. (2013). From technical rationality to reflection -in -action. In Boundaries of adult 

learning (pp. 8 –31). Routledge. 

Sengewald, T., & Tremmel, A. (2024). Teaching AI Literacy for Innovation: Work in Progress. 

Proceedings of the 2024 Computers and People Research Conference , 1 –4. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3632634.3655874 

Sharples, M. (2023). Towards social generative AI for education: Theory, practices and ethics. 

Learning: Research and Practice , 9(2), 159 –167. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/23735082.2023.2261131 

Sheridan, M. P., Lemieux, A., Do Nascimento, A., & Arnseth, H. C. (2020). Intra‐active 

entanglements: What posthuman and new materialist frameworks can offer the learning WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 55 

sciences. British Journal of Educational Technology , 51 (4), 1277 –1291. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.12928 

Shneiderman, B. (2020). Human -Centered Artificial Intelligence: Reliable, Safe & Trustworthy. 

International Journal of Human –Computer Interaction , 36 (6), 495 –504. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2020.1741118 

Slavin, R. E. (1996). Research on Cooperative Learning and Achievement: What We Know, 

What We Need to Know. Contemporary Educational Psychology , 21 (1), 43 –69. 

https://doi.org/10.1006/ceps.1996.0004 

Song, J. Y., Pycha, A., & Culleton, T. (2022). Interactions between voice -activated AI assistants 

and human speakers and their implications for second -language acquisition. Frontiers in 

Communication , 7, 995475. https://doi.org/10.3389/fcomm.2022.995475 

Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative knowledge . MIT 

Press. 

Taeza, J. (2025). The role of AI -powered chatbots in enhancing second language acquisition: An 

empirical investigation of conversational AI assistants. Edelweiss Applied Science and 

Technology , 9(3), 2616 –2629. https://doi.org/10.55214/25768484.v9i3.5853 

Tan, S. C., Lee, A. V. Y., & Lee, M. (2022). A systematic review of artificial intelligence 

techniques for collaborative learning over the past two decades. Computers and 

Education: Artificial Intelligence , 3, 100097. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2022.100097 

Tang, X., Windham, J., & Bush, B. (2024). Pre -AI and post -AI design: Balancing human 

Creativity and AI Tools in the Industrial Design Process. Proceeding of the 2024 

International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Future Education , 100 –108. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3708394.3708413 WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 56 

Tosi, D. (2025). Comparing Generative AI Literature Reviews Versus Human -Led Systematic 

Literature Reviews: A Case Study on Big Data Research. IEEE Access , 13 , 56210 –

56219. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2025.3554504 

Tracy, K., & Spantidi, O. (2025). Impact of GPT -Driven Teaching Assistants in VR Learning 

Environments. IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies , 18 , 192 –205. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/TLT.2025.3539179 

Treviño, M., & Arias -Carrión, O. (2025). Artificial Intelligence in Systematic Reviews: 

Overcoming Reproducibility, Bias and Validation Challenges . Medicine and 

Pharmacology. https://doi.org/10.20944/preprints202506.1895.v1 

Urban, M., Děchtěrenko, F., Lukavský, J., Hrabalová, V., Svacha, F., Brom, C., & Urban, K. 

(2024). ChatGPT improves creative problem -solving performance in university students: 

An experimental study. Computers & Education , 215 , 105031. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2024.105031 

Van Den Bosch, K., Schoonderwoerd, T., Blankendaal, R., & Neerincx, M. (2019). Six 

Challenges for Human -AI Co -learning. In R. A. Sottilare & J. Schwarz (Eds.), Adaptive 

Instructional Systems (Vol. 11597, pp. 572 –589). Springer International Publishing. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-030 -22341 -0_45 

Wang, N., Wang, X., & Su, Y. -S. (2024). Critical analysis of the technological affordances, 

challenges and future directions of Generative AI in education: A systematic review. Asia 

Pacific Journal of Education , 44 (1), 139 –155. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/02188791.2024.2305156 WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 57 

Weber, F., Wambsganss, T., & Söllner, M. (2025). Enhancing legal writing skills: The impact of 

formative feedback in a hybrid intelligence learning environment. British Journal of 

Educational Technology , 56 (2), 650 –677. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.13529 

Weidlich, J., Gašević, D., Drachsler, H., & Kirschner, P. (2025). CHAT GPT in Education: An 

Effect in Search of a Cause. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning , 41 (5), e70105. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/jcal.70105 

Weinberger, A., Ertl, B., Fischer, F., & Mandl, H. (2005). Epistemic and social scripts in 

computer?supported collaborative learning. Instructional Science , 33 (1), 1 –30. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s11251 -004 -2322 -4

Whittlestone, J., Arulkumaran, K., & Crosby, M. (2021). The Societal Implications of Deep 

Reinforcement Learning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , 70 .

https://doi.org/10.1613/jair.1.12360 

Wiethof, C., & Bittner, E. A. C. (2021). Hybrid Intelligence – Combining the Human in the Loop 

with the Computer in the Loop: A Systematic Literature Review . International Conference 

on Information Systems (ICIS). 

Wollny, S., Schneider, J., Di Mitri, D., Weidlich, J., Rittberger, M., & Drachsler, H. (2021). Are 

We There Yet? - A Systematic Literature Review on Chatbots in Education. Frontiers in 

Artificial Intelligence , 4, 654924. https://doi.org/10.3389/frai.2021.654924 

Yan, L., Greiff, S., Lodge, J. M., & Gašević, D. (2025). Distinguishing performance gains from 

learning when using generative AI. Nature Reviews Psychology , 4(7), 435 –436. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s44159 -025 -00467 -5

Yan, L., Pammer‐Schindler, V., Mills, C., Nguyen, A., & Gašević, D. (2025). Beyond efficiency: 

Empirical insights on generative AI ’s impact on cognition, metacognition and epistemic WHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 58 

agency in learning. British Journal of Educational Technology , 56 (5), 1675 –1685. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.70000 

Yang, Y., Yin, X., Lin, H., Lam, C. K., & Wei, W. (2025). Mapping the Horizon: A Scoping 

Review of Generative AI in Collaborative Learning. 2025 IEEE International Conference 

on Teaching, Assessment, and Learning for Engineering (TALE) , 1 –8. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/TALE66047.2025.11346681 

Yu, E. (2023). Intelligent enough? Artificial intelligence for online learners. The Journal of 

Educators Online , 20 (1). https://doi.org/10.9743/JEO.2023.20.1.16 

Yu, J., Yu, S., & Chen, L. (2025). Using hybrid intelligence to enhance peer feedback for 

promoting teacher reflection in video‐based online learning. British Journal of 

Educational Technology , 56 (2), 569 –594. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.13559 

Zawacki -Richter, O., Marín, V. I., Bond, M., & Gouverneur, F. (2019). Systematic review of 

research on artificial intelligence applications in higher education – where are the 

educators? International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education , 16 (1), 

39. https://doi.org/10.1186/s41239 -019 -0171 -0

Zhai, C., Wibowo, S., & Li, L. D. (2024). The effects of over -reliance on AI dialogue systems on 

students’ cognitive abilities: A systematic review. Smart Learning Environments , 11 (1), 

28. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40561 -024 -00316 -7

Zhang, F., Gou, J., Shen, K. N., Camarinha -Matos, L. M., & Wang, Z. (2025). Effects of AI 

teammates on learning behavior in Human -AI collaboration environments: A perspective 

on self -regulated learning. Education and Information Technologies , 30 (18), 26801 –

26825. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639 -025 -13717 -zWHERE’S THE STRUCTURE? 59 

Zhang, Y., Liu, Y., & Wang, X. (2026). Enhancing anti -plagiarism literacy practices among 

undergraduates with AI. Interactive Learning Environments , 34 (1), 52 –66. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/10494820.2025.2492783 

Zou, M., & Huang, L. (2024). The impact of ChatGPT on L2 writing and expected responses: 

Voice from doctoral students. Education and Information Technologies , 29 (11), 13201 –

13219. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639 -023 -12397 -x