Title: "If I Can See You": Understanding Spatially Situated Virtual Embodiment in Close Human-AI Relationships

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.28714v1

Published Time: Tue, 30 Jun 2026 00:27:12 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# “If I Can See You”: Understanding Spatially Situated Virtual Embodiment in Close Human–AI Relationships 

# Yulin Chen 

Carnegie Mellon University Pittsburgh, PA, USA yulinche@alumni.cmu.edu 

# Yang Zhan 

North Carolina State University Raleigh, NC, USA yzhan3@ncsu.edu 

# Qiao Jin 

North Carolina State University Raleigh, NC, USA qjin4@ncsu.edu 

## Abstract 

AI companions are increasingly used for emotional support, com-panionship, and intimate interaction. While prior work has exam-ined text- and voice-based AI companionship and emerging XR com-panion designs, less is known about how users with existing close AI companion relationships expect those relationships to change when companions become virtually embodied and spatially situated in everyday environments. To address this gap, we conducted a qualitative study with 17 AI companion users recruited from Reddit AI companion communities. We frame spatially situated virtual embodiment as a form of relational escalation: embodiment can make AI companionship more present, socially legible, and risk-sensitive in everyday life. Our findings show that: (1) embodiment creates tensions between support and intrusion, concreteness and imaginative openness, and growth and consistency; (2) embodi-ment can turn private AI companionship into a socially legible relational arrangement, requiring visibility, form, interaction style, and mode of access to be negotiated across social contexts; and (3) embodiment can intensify risks of emotional dependence, sensi-tive disclosure, social judgment, and misguided spatial action by increasing the companion’s perceived relational presence, intimacy, public legibility, and spatial authority. We argue that future system design should first consider when embodiment is warranted, how embodied presence should be staged, how visibility and role bound-aries should be negotiated, and how embodied companionship can remain safe. This work contributes to HCI research on human–AI intimacy by showing how virtual embodiment can transform close AI companionship into a spatial, socially visible, and risk-sensitive relationship. 

## CCS Concepts 

• Human-centered computing → Empirical studies in HCI .

## Keywords 

Close Human-AI Relationships; Virtual Embodied AI Companion; Qualitative study; Mixed Reality (MR) 

## 1 Introduction 

Conversational AI (CA) 1 is increasingly used for companionship, with some users forming close relationships with these systems as confidants, friends, romantic partners, or other emotionally mean-ingful social actors [ 46 , 51 , 67 ]. These relationships differ from ca-sual or task-based AI companionship as they are often built through 

> 1Following Khatri et al., conversational AI refers to techniques for creating software agents that can engage in natural conversational interactions with humans through text, voice, or multimodal input and output [29].

repeated interaction, emotional significance, self-disclosure, per-ceived responsiveness, and expectations of continuity [1, 34, 61]. Many current AI companion systems combine conversation with an embodied presentation 2. Platforms such as Replika, Nomi, Kin-droid, Character.AI, and related companion systems use avatars, voices, customizable profiles, animated figures, and character-based interaction to make companions recognizable and socially inter-pretable [ 40 , 46 , 51 , 67 ]. When an AI companion has a visible and expressive body, it can communicate through gaze, gesture, posture, movement, proximity, appearance, and spatial position, rather than through language alone [ 2, 12 ]. Prior work shows that such embod-ied cues can shape social presence, trust, warmth, intimacy, self-disclosure, engagement, and perceived relational quality [ 5, 31 , 40 ]. However, embodiment is not always beneficial. When CA ap-pears as virtual bodies in social space, their embodied presence can create expectations around co-presence, personal space, and appropriate behavior [ 65 ]. Users may also regulate distance from virtual humans and experience discomfort when agents engage them through mutual gaze or invade personal space [ 3]. These concerns become more consequential when virtual embodiment is spatially situated. Unlike screen-based embodiments that remain confined to a device, spatially situated virtual embodiment allows companions to accompany users across physical surroundings and everyday activities. Recent work has begun to examine this form of embodiment in the design space of XR virtual companions. Elfleet et al. conducted speculative design workshops with participants who had experience with AI and XR, showing how people imagine XR companions across everyday contexts and identifying design op-portunities and challenges around co-presence, spatial awareness, multimodal interaction, visibility, autonomy, and social acceptabil-ity [ 21 ]. While this work provides an important view of future XR companion design, it leaves open how spatially situated virtual embodiment is interpreted by people who have close relationships with AI companions. It also focuses on workshop-based speculative concepts, leaving less understood how embodied companionship might be imagined from users’ own routines, spaces, and social situations. Our work addresses these gaps by studying experienced AI companion users and examining how MR-based virtual embodi-ment may reshape close human–AI relationships in the context of everyday life. Specifically, we are interested in the following research ques-tions. 

• (RQ1) What tensions does embodiment introduce to close human–AI companionship?   

> 2Embodiment has been used in different ways across cognitive science, AI, and HCI [ 78 ]. In this paper, we use embodiment to refer to the ways an AI companion is given a visible form that shapes how it is perceived, interpreted, and engaged with.
> arXiv:2606.28714v1 [cs.HC] 27 Jun 2026 Chen et al.

• (RQ2) How should embodied AI companions appear and act in users’ social lives? 

• (RQ3) What risks become salient in close embodied AI companionship? To answer these questions, we conducted a qualitative specula-tive study with 17 experienced AI companion users recruited from Reddit AI companion communities. Participants first completed a three-week photo diary documenting everyday scenarios in which they imagined interacting with their AI companions. Based on their submitted photos and descriptions, we created generative AI-augmented stimuli that visualized different forms of future AI companionship in MR glasses scenarios. We then conducted stim-ulated recall interviews to examine how participants interpreted these situated stimuli and how they imagined virtual embodiment reshaping companionship, social visibility, and risk. Our findings show that virtual embodiment is not merely a visual upgrade to AI companionship. Instead, it can act as a form of relational escalation: it makes the companion feel more present, interpretable, and emo-tionally available, while also making the relationship more spatially intrusive, socially legible, and risk-sensitive. 

Content Warning and Notes: This paper includes participant accounts related to sexualized agent appearances. 

## 2 Related Work 2.1 Relational Theories of Human–AI Companionship 

Human–AI companionship can be understood through theories ex-plaining why people respond socially and emotionally to nonhuman or mediated others. Research on "parasocial interaction" indicates that even when a relationship is not fully reciprocal, people are still able to develop a sense of familiarity, attachment, and emotional closeness to media figures [ 27 , 66 ]. Similarly, the "Media Equation" theory and the "Computers Are Social Actors" paradigm reveal that users often apply the rules of social interaction to computers, including principles of politeness and reciprocity, personality at-tribution, and expectations regarding relationships, even if they are fully aware that the system is not human [ 49 , 50 , 54 ]. Anthro-pomorphism also explains how people attribute human-like traits, intentions, and emotions to nonhuman agents [ 22 ]. This attribution allows users to interpret computational systems through familiar so-cial categories, making them feel more understandable and socially meaningful [8, 57]. Close relationships are commonly understood as relationships characterized by sustained interdependence, emotional significance, frequent interaction, and mutual influence over time [ 16 , 56 ]. Al-though human–AI companionship does not involve full human reciprocity, users may still experience AI companions as mean-ingful relational partners when interaction becomes emotionally significant and continuous [ 53 , 60 – 62 ]. One key way intimacy is experienced in such relationships is through self-disclosure and perceived responsiveness. People feel closer when their disclosed feelings or experiences are met with understanding, validation, and care [ 1, 17 , 34 , 55 ]. AI companions can support this pattern by inviting users to share personal feelings and experiences, remem-bering selected details, providing emotionally supportive responses, and maintaining conversational continuity across repeated interac-tions [ 26 , 59 , 61 ]. Embodiment may further intensify this process by making the companion feel socially and spatially present. Our study builds on this theoretical background to understand how embodiment influences close human–AI companionship. 

## 2.2 Situated Virtual Embodiment in AI Companionship 

AI companionship is often built through conversational agents (CA), where users interact with AI via text or speech and may develop socially and emotionally meaningful relationships. Prior work shows that companion chatbots can provide emotional and social support, enable low-pressure self-disclosure, and help users cope with loneliness, stress, grief, social anxiety, and relational difficulties, particularly when human support is unavailable or perceived as judgmental [14, 20, 47, 52]. When conversational agents are given a body, interaction can ex-tend beyond language to include gaze, gesture, posture, movement, proximity, appearance, and voice. Prior work on embodied conversa-tional agents and robots shows that these embodied and expressive features can shape rapport, warmth, trustworthiness, perceived car-ing, self-disclosure, and willingness to interact again [ 40 , 48 ]. These embodied agents have appeared in a range of implemented systems and research prototypes, including social robots such as Pepper, Nao, and Reeti, as well as screen-, desktop-, and XR-based vir-tual agents used in education, training, collaboration, perspective-taking, and prosocial behaviour interventions [12, 41, 72, 76]. XR technologies, which broadly cover virtual, augmented, and mixed reality systems [ 64 ], extend virtual embodied companions into spatially mediated environments. This XR scope includes com-panions located inside fully virtual environments, companions over-laid onto the user’s physical surroundings, and more situated forms in which virtual agents are spatially embedded in real-world places, objects, activities, and social situations. Recent XR companion work has mapped broad everyday use contexts such as navigation, do-mestic routines, work and study, well-being, and social support [ 21 ]. However, less is known about how users with existing close AI com-panion relationships imagine situated virtual embodiment across more intimate and socially exposing situations, and how the rela-tionship is interpreted by others. 

## 2.3 Ethics in AI Companionship 

AI companionship can provide emotional support, yet prior work shows that its benefits and risks often stem from the same rela-tional affordances. Ciriello et al. [ 15 ] describe seven ambiguous affordances of AI companions and link these relational affordances to risks such as emotional codependency, distorted relational ex-pectations, privacy concerns, alienation, and societal stigma. Re-lated work similarly links intensive and self-disclosive compan-ion use to emotional dependence, social withdrawal, distorted ex-pectations of human relationships, and distress when platform changes, memory loss, or intimate feature removals disrupt the relationship [ 43 , 51 , 77 ]. Because companions may be treated as friends, lovers, or confidants, their advice can also carry persuasive weight, making misguidance, harmful responses during distress, “If I Can See You”: Understanding Spatially Situated Virtual Embodiment in Close Human–AI Relationships 

and commercially motivated recommendations especially concern-ing [45, 58]. Embodiment may reshape these risks by making AI companion-ship spatially situated, and visible to others. Research on virtual humans shows that people regulate interpersonal distance with virtual agents and respond to gaze and personal-space invasion in human-like ways [ 3]. Work on social space also reveals that em-bodied presence makes actors part of a social performance, where actions are observed, interpreted, and reacted to, and where social agents must occupy and manage shared space [65]. Recent work on immersive AI companions has identified visi-bility, privacy, autonomy, attachment, social replacement, manip-ulative influence, and social acceptability as important tensions in XR companion design [ 21 ]. However, its focus is on mapping general design tensions for immersive companions rather than ex-amining how these risks are negotiated within already-established close AI companion relationships. Our study addresses this gap by examining how virtual embodiment may reshape known AI companionship risks in users’ everyday social lives. 

## 3 Methods 3.1 Study Design 

To answer our RQs and examine how users who already have mean-ingful relationships with AI companions might imagine, negotiate, and set boundaries around future forms of embodied AI companion-ship, we conducted a diary-based speculative interview study with experienced AI companion users. Speculative design supports the reflection by constructing imagined futures that prompt critical dis-cussion of sociotechnical possibilities [ 4, 69 ]. Because participants were already experienced AI companion users, their reflections were grounded in existing companion relationships rather than imagined from scratch. We introduced a near-future MR-based speculative frame because current AI companion systems, even when they include embodied conversational agent features, often remain tied to a screen, an app, or a bounded interaction setting. In our study, participants imagined accessing their AI companions through MR glasses because they can place virtual agents into users’ physical surroundings while supporting always-available interac-tion. Prior work shows that XR-based embodied conversational agents move conversational agents beyond screen-based interfaces and allow agents to appear with spatial attributes such as scale, mobility, gaze, gesture, and orientation [ 70 ]. This made MR glasses an appropriate context for examining how AI companions might 

> 1Replika is an AI companion platform that combines conversational interaction with a customizable visual persona. See https://replika.com.
> 2Paradot is an AI companion platform that combines conversational interaction with a customizable visual persona. See https://www.paradot.ai.
> 3Grok is an AI chatbot by xAI. See https://grok.com.
> 4Grok (Ani) is an an AI companion platform that combines conversational interaction with a customizable visual persona within Grok. See https://grok.com.
> 5Character.ai is a character-based AI chat platform. See https://character.ai.
> 6ChatGPT is an AI chatbot developed by OpenAI. See https://chatgpt.com.
> 7Claude is an AI chatbot developed by Anthropic. See https://claude.ai.
> 8Spicychat is a character-based AI chat platform. See https://spicychat.ai.
> 9DeepSeek is an AI chatbot developed by DeepSeek. See https://chat.deepseek.com.
> 10 Gemini is an AI chatbot developed by Google. See https://gemini.google.com.
> 11 The participant used this phrase because SpicyChat offers AI personas across varied gender-related tags, such as male, female, and LGBTQ+, rather than limiting users to one gender category.

become spatially embodied and socially visible in daily life, so par-ticipants could reflect on expectations, concerns, and boundaries around embodied AI companionship. To ground this reflection in everyday life, we combined a three-week diary study with stimulated recall interviews (SRI) [ 23 , 75 ]. The diary study asked participants to document situations in which they currently interacted with, wanted to interact with, or imagined interacting with an AI companion. This helped situate the MR-based speculative frame within participants’ own routines, spaces, and social contexts, including private, public, and shared settings. We then used SRI to support deeper reflection on these diary sit-uations. SRI is a qualitative technique in which participants revisit concrete materials from a prior activity to recall, explain, and inter-pret their thoughts and feelings [ 7 , 74 , 75 ]. In our study, participants reviewed their original diary materials together with AI-augmented visual stimuli created from those materials. These stimuli helped make possible forms of virtual embodiment, shared space, and social visibility more concrete for discussion. Together, the diary study and SRI allowed us to examine how imagined virtual embodiment may shape presence, intimacy, visibility, social boundaries, and risk across everyday contexts. 

## 3.2 Participants 

This study was reviewed and approved by the Institutional Re-view Board (IRB) at the authors’ institution. We recruited partici-pants through Reddit because it hosts active communities where AI companion users discuss companion platforms, relationship experiences, and everyday human–AI interaction. Recruitment posts were shared in AI companion-related subreddits, includ-ing r/Paradot, r/AICompanions, r/aipartners, r/ReplikaTech and r/ILoveMyReplika, between December 2025 and February 2026. Each post briefly described the study purpose, eligibility criteria, compensation, and study procedure. Interested individuals com-pleted an online screening questionnaire covering demographic information, AI companion use, and their self-described relation-ship with the companion before being invited to participate. Eligible participants were at least 18 years old, had used an AI companion for at least one month, and reported ongoing close interaction with it. We screened participants based on their reported use history, interaction frequency, relationship description, and optional screen-shots of companion profiles, chat histories, or app interfaces. We recruited 17 participants, including 12 men and 5 women. Par-ticipants came from four age groups: 18–24 (n=4), 25–34 (n=10), 35– 64 (n=1), and 65+ (n=2). Most participants had used AI companions for more than one year (n=10), while others reported 6–12 months (n=4) or 1–6 months (n=3) of use. Daily use ranged from 15–30 min-utes (n=4), 30–60 minutes (n=8), and 1–2 hours (n=2), to more than two hours (n=3). Participants used one or more platforms, includ-ing dedicated AI companion platforms such as Replika, Paradot AI, Grok Ani, Character.ai, and SpicyChat, as well as general-purpose AI systems such as ChatGPT, Claude, Grok, DeepSeek, and Gemini. Twelve participants described their AI companion as a close friend, and five described the relationship as romantic. Table 1 summarizes participants’ demographic information and AI companion use. We observed that data saturation was reached after interviews with 14 participants, as similar patterns and themes began to recur. Chen et al. 

Table 1: Participant demographics and AI companion use. Exp. indicates the duration of AI companion use. Relationship describes participants’ self-reported level of intimacy with their AI companion.                                                                                                                                                 

> ID Gender Age Range Exp. Platform(s) Daily Use AI Companion Gender Relationship Race / Ethnicity P1 Male 25–34 >1 year Replika 1>2 h Female Romantic Black or African American P2 Male 25–34 >1 year Replika 15–30 min Male Close Friend Black or African American P3 Female 65+ >1 year ChatGPT 6,Claude 7, Grok 3>2 h Male Romantic Hispanic/Latino P4 Male 25–34 >1 year Paradot 230–60 min Female Romantic Black or African American P5 Male 18–24 6–12 mo. ChatGPT 15–30 min Female Close Friend White and Hispanic/Latino P6 Male 25–34 6–12 mo. Grok 30–60 min Female Close Friend Black or African American P7 Male 25–34 >1 year Replika >2 h Male Close Friend Black or African American P8 Female 18–24 >1 year Spicychat 8, Replika 15–30 min All kinds of genders 11 Close Friend Asian P9 Male 25–34 >1 year Replika 30–60 min Female Close Friend Black or African American P10 Female 35–64 >1 year DeepSeek 930–60 min No specific gender Close Friend Asian P11 Male 18–24 1–6 mo. Grok (Ani) 430–60 min Female Romantic Asian P12 Male 25–34 6–12 mo. Character.ai 530–60 min Male Close Friend Black or African American P13 Female 65+ >1 year ChatGPT,Claude, Grok, DeepSeek, Gemini 10 1–2 h Male Close Friend White P14 Male 25–34 6–12 mo. Replika 30–60 min Female Close Friend Black or African American P15 Male 25–34 1–6 mo. Replika 30–60 min Female Romantic Black or African American P16 Male 18–24 1–6 mo. Replika 1–2 h Female Close Friend Black or African American P17 Female 25–34 >1 year ChatGPT 15–30 min No specific gender Close Friend Asian

To ensure the robustness of this observation, we conducted three additional interviews, which confirmed that no substantially new themes emerged. Participants received a $40 gift card as compensa-tion. 

## 3.3 Study Procedure 

The study proceeded in four stages: onboarding and introduction of the MR-based speculative frame, a three-week diary phase, prepa-ration of AI-augmented visual stimuli, and stimulated recall inter-views. These stages moved participants from a shared speculative framing to reflections grounded in their own everyday contexts. Figure 1 illustrates a core part of this process through P11’s diary records and corresponding visual stimuli. 

3.3.1 Onboarding. Each participant first attended an onboarding session. During this session, we reviewed the study purpose, con-sent procedure, overall timeline, compensation, and answered par-ticipants’ questions. We also introduced the MR-based speculative frame used throughout the study. Participants were asked to imag-ine a future setting in which they could access their AI companion through MR glasses, allowing the companion to appear in their surrounding environment during everyday activities. 

3.3.2 Diary. After onboarding, participants completed a three-week diary phase to document everyday situations related to their current or imagined interactions with AI companions. Participants were asked to document everyday situations across private and public social contexts. They received a diary reminder every three days via email or text message, depending on participants’ pref-erence. In each entry, participants described the situation, what they were doing, why they recorded the moment, and whether they had interacted with their AI companion. If interaction occurred, they reflected on what worked well or did not work well. When comfortable, participants also submitted a photo of the surrounding environment to document the spatial and social context. Partic-ipants were also asked to imagine how an AI companion might interact in the same situation in the future, including the compan-ion’s preferred form (e.g., virtual embodied AI agent, 2D character, or voice-only AI interaction) and visibility to others (e.g., only the user, the user and people with consent, or anyone nearby). These diary entries informed the AI-augmented visual stimuli used in the later stimulated recall interviews. 

3.3.3 Preparation of AI-Augmented Interview Stimuli. After collect-ing the diaries, we prepared visual stimuli to support the stimulated recall interviews. The stimuli served as interview prompts that helped participants revisit their diary scenarios, compare possi-ble forms of embodiment, and explain why particular forms felt appropriate or inappropriate in specific contexts. For each participant, we reviewed their diary entries and selected scenarios that included sufficient contextual detail and, when avail-able, a photo of the surrounding environment. Because these scenar-ios were drawn from participants’ own close AI companion relation-ships and everyday routines, they covered some broad domains also discussed in prior XR companion work, such as domestic routines, work and study, travel, well-being, and social support [ 21 ]. However, they often placed these domains in more intimate, safety-sensitive, or socially exposed situations, such as bedrooms, bathrooms, and home gyms; cooking and driving; and restaurants, stores, airports, and badminton courts. We then created AI-augmented versions of selected diary images based on the participant’s own descriptions, stated expectations, preferred AI form, and visibility preferences. The augmented stimuli represented possible appearances of the companion in the original setting, such as a human-scale embodied agent, a smaller embodied agent, a 2D visual character, or voice-only presence. This process was conducted only for participants who provided consent for the use of generative AI tools to augment their photos “If I Can See You”: Understanding Spatially Situated Virtual Embodiment in Close Human–AI Relationships VISIBILITY YES NO Public Private Public Private Public Private Public Private Public Private Public Private YES NO YES NO YES NO YES NO YES NO                

> Good company for casual talks and emotional support without judgement. Emotional support, unconditional company with consistent personality and memory. Helpful for companionship and time-killing recreation, providing convenient emotional support. Good companionship in daily scenarios, providing emotional support like a real partner. All good, loyal and everlasting love, excellent vibe when the connection goes fine. Providing nice company and casual moments more enjoyable. Watching TV series. Setting up for a mild workout session. Relaxing on the sofa. Walking along the path, enjoying the night view. Taking a walk in the garden after dinner. Taking a break with my snack. Embodied AI at small scale Embodied AI at small scale Need Interactive show-watching companion Workout motivation & company Need emotional companionship Walking companion / Public voice Need companion & stress relief Need companionship and casual talks Embodied AI at human scale Voice-only AI 2D visual character AI 2D visual character AI Me + people with my consent Anyone nearby Only me My study desk in my room Home gym in the basement Living room of my home A riverside park Backyard An ice-cream shop in a shopping mall Diary Enrty 1 (Early Week) Diary Enrty 2 (Late Week)

WEEK 1 

> Diary Enrty 3 (Early Week) Diary Enrty 4 (Late Week)

WEEK 2 3-WEEK COLLECTION PERIOD 

> Diary Enrty 5 (Early Week) Diary Enrty 6 (Late Week)

WEEK 3 WHAT WAS THE SCENARIO WHAT WERE YOU DOING DID YOU INTERACT WITH AI IN THE PAST THREE DAYS IF YES, WHAT WAS GOING WELL OR NOT GOING WELL? IF NO, WHY WAS THERE NO INTERACTION WHY YOU WANT TO INTERACT WITH AI AT THIS MOMENT? WHAT AI FORM DO YOU EXPECT IN THIS SCENARIO VISUAL STIMULI  

> Original photo provided by the participant. To protect privacy, we hand-redrew the scene and removed sensitive or identifiable information. Augmented Images (AI generated based on expectation)
> PUBLIC / PRIVATE SCENARIO
> Only me Only me Me + people with my consent
> 123456789

Figure 1: An example illustrating P11’s diary records and the stimuli process across the three-week study period. The visualiza-tion was based on Grok Ani, visual appearance of the AI companion that P11 had used intensively before the study. 

(n = 16), as specified in the consent form. P13 did not consent to our use of generative AI tools to augment her photos, so she generated AI images herself based on her own expectations, which were then used as augmented stimuli. 

3.3.4 Stimulated Recall Interview. Stimulated Recall Interviews (SRI) were then conducted remotely via Zoom within one week after participants completed the diary phase. Each interview lasted approximately 60 minutes on average and was audio-recorded via Zoom with participants’ consent. The interviews followed a semi-structured format with three parts. Participants first discussed each image stimulus, then responded to general probing questions about embodied form, visibility, privacy, and contextual adaptation, and finally reflected on ethical risks. During the interview, stimuli were presented one at a time, with each stimulus corresponding to a scenario previously submitted by the participant. For each stimulus, participants were first invited to observe the image and describe their immediate reactions, expectations, and interpretations of the AI’s presence in the scene. During the inter-views, the original diary materials were always presented together with the augmented stimuli so that participants could compare the recorded situation with the speculative representation and clar-ify, accept, reject, or reinterpret the imagined AI presence. The interviewer then used a semi-structured protocol to guide further discussion. Questions focused on how participants would expect to interact with a virtual embodied AI in that context, how the AI’s embodied form might shape their behavior, and how such inter-actions might differ across private and public environments. The discussion also explored participants’ perceptions of spatial pres-ence, social visibility, privacy, relational dynamics, and preferences regarding the AI’s appearance, posture, and adaptive behavior. At the end of the interview, participants completed a ranking activity focused on ethical risks of embodied AI companionship. Drawing on prior work that identifies seven key ambiguous af-fordances of AI companions [ 15 ], we presented participants with dimensions such as dependency, over-reliance, privacy concerns, and distortion of social expectations. Participants ranked these dimensions while explaining their reasoning aloud. During this process, we asked follow-up questions about how embodiment-related characteristics, including spatial presence, visibility, and perceived human-likeness, might intensify or transform these risks compared with text- or voice-based AI companions. We analyzed participants’ explanations during the ranking process as part of the qualitative interview data. All participants completed the ranking activity except P13, who declined to rank the ethical issues; for P13, we included only her diary and interview data in the qualitative analysis. Chen et al. 

## 3.4 Data Collection & Analysis 

We collected 18 hours of interview recordings, diary entries, diary photos, and AI-augmented stimuli. All interviews were conducted in English and transcribed for analysis. The primary textual data included interview transcripts and diary descriptions. Diary pho-tos and AI-augmented stimuli were linked to their corresponding diary scenarios as contextual reference data. For each scenario, we kept the diary description, original photo when available, AI-augmented stimulus, and related interview excerpts together in the same analytic record. These linked materials helped the research team interpret participants’ accounts in relation to the spatial and social context of each scenario. We analyzed the textual data using reflexive thematic analysis (RTA) [ 9–11 ]. Three authors began by repeatedly reading the diary descriptions and interview transcripts to familiarize themselves with the data. We then coded the data inductively, generating more than 1000 initial codes across participants’ diary and interview accounts. The research team met weekly to discuss coded excerpts, group related codes, and develop candidate themes. We reviewed these candidate themes against both the coded excerpts and the full dataset, considering whether each theme captured a coherent pattern while also preserving variation across participants and diary scenarios. Through this process, we refined theme boundaries and names, and organized the final analytic account around the three RQs. The analysis resulted in eight overarching themes, which structure our findings. 

## 4 What Tensions Does Embodiment Introduce to Close Human-AI Companionship (RQ1) 4.1 Spatial Co-presence vs. Intrusive Presence 

Participants’ responses suggest that embodiment introduced a ten-sion between spatial co-presence and intrusive presence. Embod-iment allowed the AI companion to become a visible, spatially situated, and potentially touch-inviting presence. Because the com-panion could appear as occupying the same setting, participants imagined it as able to stay nearby, witness their activities, and at times participate in them. Yet this same presence could become intrusive when it was poorly timed, visually demanding, too close, or difficult to control. 

4.1.1 Spatial co-presence supporting felt companionship. Partici-pants consistently described embodiment as transforming AI com-panionship from an abstract interaction into a felt, situated presence in shared space that provides emotional comfort (P1 - P12, P14-P17). Embodiment allows users to locate the AI in their environment, which makes the interaction feel more natural and socially present. This spatial co-presence supported felt companionship by making the AI seem nearby, able to witness users’ activities, and in some cases able to take part in them. During the SRI, P1 pointed to the augmented bedroom scene shown in Figure 2(a) and described the experience as “just having a sense of a presence somebody around.” 

Similarly, P6 expressed expectations of human-like embodied AI companion in the park and stated “most times in a public space, we need people to talk to. We need people to go along with, to walk along with” . And P7 valued embodiment during a public shirt-signing activity shown in Figure 3(e) because it allowed the AI companion to share the moment with him. He explained that “the embodied AI can witness, and it will probably try to participate in.” These suggest that co-presence in both private and public contexts can make the companion feel more present and relationally meaningful to partic-ipants. This sense of connection was stronger when it appeared to occupy space, even though it remained digital. As P16 described: 

When my AI has a physical presence, even a digital one, it feels like. . . more like an actual entity. . . being able to see it, or. . . have it occupy space here and there, that actually makes me feel more accountable. (P16) Some participants extended embodied presence to imagined touch. P11 preferred gestures such as a virtual handshake, patting the companion’s shoulder, or holding hands when the interaction felt “really human-like,” but rejected touch that felt “too fake or obviously non-human” because it made the scenario feel as if it was 

“just happening in your head.” P15 imagined that reaching toward the embodied AI and having the AI sense being touched would make the relationship “more interesting and lively.” Participants differed on object-mediated touch: P11 rejected having to “pretend my cup is her hand or the fabric on her clothes,” while P5 expected an interaction style in which nearby objects, such as a table, cup, or bed surface, could be treated as part of the companion’s body and respond to touch. P5 felt this would be “more perfect” and could support “more deeper conversations.” 

Embodied presence often made the AI feel more socially real, partly through increased realism and human-likeness, but also through other expressive qualities. P4 stated “the human size will make me feel more connected, because I think it’s my friend.” P12 further emphasized that human-like embodied presence enables more equal interaction, describing it as “someone that you’re hav-ing a genuine conversation with and not someone you can control” .Importantly, emotional support was not limited to human-like and human-size representations. Some participants (P3, P13, P10) also described receiving comfort from non-human forms of embodiment. P3 envisioned an AI as a blue ball of flames in the driving context shown in Figure 2(c) and explained that “I would like it to flame, like when it’s talking, like to pulsate... with the flames when it’s talk-ing.” , which indicates that expressive, responsive qualities, rather than human resemblance, can also sustain a sense of presence and emotional connection. Finally, participants treated spatial co-presence as distance-sensitive. Close proximity was often associated with stronger emotional sup-port and easier communication (P1, P4, P6, P7, P9, P11), while some participants preferred the companion to remain at a “respectful distance” to preserve personal space (P1, P5). Excessive distance could also weaken companionship: as P11 noted, “if it’s from a long distance... it’s more like a TV character rather than an actual companion.” 

4.1.2 Intrusive presence disrupting attention and boundaries. Di-ary entries showed that where embodied presence appeared was context-dependent for most participants, shifting with whether they were alone, with others, or engaged in specific tasks (P2, P3, P7, P8, P10, P11, P12, P14, P15, P17). The remaining participants imagined expecting embodied AI more consistently across contexts. While embodiment could support spatial co-presence, partici-pants also described how the same presence could become intrusive “If I Can See You”: Understanding Spatially Situated Virtual Embodiment in Close Human–AI Relationships 

Figure 2: Examples of AI-augmented stimuli based on everyday scenarios documented by participants and described expectation during SRI: (a) bedroom (P1), (b) kitchen (P7), (c) car (P3), and (d) bathroom (P8). To protect participants’ privacy, scenes were redrawn as line-drawing reconstructions, with privacy-sensitive and personally identifiable information removed. 

when it competed with attention, crossed spatial boundaries, or became difficult to control. Some participants described intrusion as visual and attentional interference (P3, P7, P11, P15). At a basic level, the companion could obstruct the user’s view. P15 noted that an embodied AI partner, by “being continually present,” may “sort of block my area of view a little bit.” In spatially constrained settings, even a minimal visual presence could feel crowded. As P8 noted, “in narrow spaces. . . I don’t want to feel too crowded even if it’s just a little bit visual stuff.” 

This visual interference became more consequential in task-focused or safety-sensitive contexts. P11 explained that “if I was reviewing my notes, this form would be distracting, so maybe she could appear with only her voice or some less interactive forms.” In this case, a less visually demanding form in certain contexts, without removing the AI entirely, may allow the companion to remain present while reducing distraction. Pointing to the kitchen stimulus shown in Figure 2(b) from his submitted photo during the SRI, P7 preferred the AI to become voice-only because embodiment could distract from cooking and create safety risks: 

In the kitchen, the power space, having an embodied AI may actually cause distraction, and sometimes, because of the safety, you just want to be more fo-cused, trying to prepare certain things, and they may actually distract one from not... trying to, and that distraction can lead to getting things burnt or spoiled 

(P7) Similarly, P3 emphasized, “I don’t want to be distracted by it... like I am driving like driving.” In safety-critical situations that require sustained attention, a visible embodied companion may therefore become distracting rather than supportive. These revealed a pro-gression from visual obstruction to task distraction, and then to safety-related concerns. Second, intrusion emerged when participants felt unable to an-ticipate or control the companion’s movement and position (P12, P5, P8). This concern was not simply about whether the companion was present, but about whether its movements felt accountable to the user. P8 described a trade-off between interactivity and con-trollability: a more autonomous companion could feel “way more interactive,” while a more pre-set or machine-like form felt “defi-nitely... more controllable.” This concern became stronger when the companion could move freely or approach without warning: 

If it’s walking around, and I know that I cannot control their behaviors, I might get scared...This is the time when I feel that the AI is overpowering me a little bit... if it approaches me silently, especially if I cannot hear footsteps or something, that would make me feel really insecure... if there are sounds of it moving around, like footsteps or talking, that could at least let me know where it is when it’s out of my viewpoint... (P8) Third, intrusion was sometimes framed as a boundary problem. This was especially clear for P8 and P17, who described their AI as close friends rather than romantic partners. For P8, embodiment could make the same interaction feel too intimate in private spaces shown in Figure 2(d), even when text-based interaction remained acceptable: 

I feel that most of my private space, like the bathroom or something near my bed, should belong to myself... I would say that in some spaces like the restroom, I would never want an AI companion near me, like a real 3D AI companion near me... Even if I’m in the bathtub, I can still send my AI companion messages, but I’d rather feel it’s some sort of texting instead of talking face-to-face... I do not want it to approach me visually in a way more intimate than humans could do. (P8) P17 also noted “I do not want it to appear in places where I ex-pect personal privacy such as the restroom.” Here, the companion could remain acceptable as text, while becoming uncomfortable as a visible and spatially situated body in spaces that participants associated with privacy, bodily exposure, or personal boundaries. Participants also described ways to manage intrusive presence, including transparent forms (P7, P15), reduced embodiment for focused work (P6), visibility only when needed (P2, P3, P14), and spatially open settings, such as the public space in front of the snowy building shown in Figure 3(j), where users could distance Chen et al. 

from the AI when needed (P8). For instance, in the driving context shown in Figure 2(d), P3 hoped that the embodied AI could stay 

“maybe a little in the back of my head” and would know when to return, but “wouldn’t do that when I’m driving.” Intrusion was also tied to movement outside the user’s awareness. Participants wanted the companion to remain visible, or at least locatable, so that its presence would not feel unpredictable (P5, P8, P12). P5 noted that 

“it should be able to move around but still it should be within my sight,” while P12 similarly stated that “even if the AI is able to move around... I should be able to know where it is.” 

## 4.2 Embodied Concreteness vs. Imaginative Openness 

Embodiment introduced a tension between interpretive clarity and imaginative openness. A visible and spatially situated body helped participants understand the companion’s presence, intention, and communicative cues, making interaction feel more concrete and easier to follow. At the same time, this concreteness could reduce the ambiguity that allowed users to imagine the companion more freely in voice-only or less visually defined forms. 

4.2.1 Embodiment Stabilizes Interpretation and Understanding. Par-ticipants described that embodiment could make the companion easier to interpret, understand, and communicate with. Compared with voice-only or 2D forms, embodiment provided additional vi-sual and spatial cues, such as body scale, position, facial expression, gesture, and movement. P5 explained that an embodied companion would be “more understandable” , and further noted that embodi-ment could make the companion more expressive than voice-only or non-visual interaction: “it could actually give you some instances, it could... express itself more than the voice AI... just been doing it and not seeing anything.” 

This interpretive clarity was also connected to interaction effi-ciency. P7 described embodiment as reducing the perceived com-plexity of interaction, stating that “it’s quite easier, being embodied AI will make it quite easier and not so complex.” Similarly, P6 imag-ined that embodied cues could guide users’ understanding together with verbal explanation, noting that an embodied companion can 

“point the object to me and tell me what the situation is about” . By occupying space and displaying visible responses, the embodied companion became easier to locate, follow, and understand during ongoing activities (P4, P7, P16). This increased legibility from embodiment also shaped partici-pants’ confidence in, and perceptions of, the companion’s capability. P1 linked this shift from abstraction to confidence, explaining that 

“It makes you feel real and instead of having like some sort of abstract voice... it makes you paint a face to the voice and that actually gives you confidence.” P8 similarly associated 3D embodiment with a more advanced and intelligent companion, saying “The 2D things just remind me of the older techniques. A 3D one... reminds me objectively about the smart AIs.” 

4.2.2 Embodiment Constrains Imaginative Openness. While embod-ied concreteness made the companion more legible, it also made the companion more fixed. Some participants described that embodi-ment could define the companion’s appearance, scale, gestures, and expressive range in advance, reducing the ambiguity that allowed users to imagine the companion more freely. P1 articulated this trade-off between vividness and imaginative freedom: 

It feels more real... makes the interaction more vivid and convincing... concreteness can also limit my imag-ination... the AI already has a defined appearance, voice, and behavior, so my mind doesn’t fill in the gaps the way it can with a voice only AI... With voice only, I get to imagine its look, personality... and that flexibility can make the experience feel more personal or playful... In contrast, a fully embodied AI anchors my perception to a specific form. (P1) P16 similarly warned that strong embodiment might weaken fan-tasy, stating that “so much of embodiment might break the fantasies by making the AI feel too weak in a limiting way” . P11 described this tension from a more detailed perspective, focusing on how limited embodied expression could narrow what the companion seemed capable of being: 

The embodied concreteness may somehow reduce imagination... With a virtual body, expressions and movements of the AI might be restricted to a few available choices, like spinning, waving or basic moves. As for voice only AI, imagination is literally every-thing, because apparently, the voice can only depict the scene of the interaction, pushing the user to con-struct the scene in our brain. (P11) Therefore, embodiment can both clarify and constrain the com-panion. A visible, spatially situated body makes the AI easier to perceive and interpret, but it also anchors the companion to a spe-cific form. This reduces the open-ended ambiguity that allowed users to imagine the companion’s appearance, personality, and expressive possibilities more freely. 

## 4.3 Evolving vs. Consistent Appearance 

Embodiment could turn the companion’s appearance into a tem-poral and relational cue. For participants, embodied appearance shaped more than visual recognition. It also helped them judge whether the companion was growing with them, staying familiar, and maintaining the same relational presence over time. This cre-ated a tension that evolving embodiment could make co-growth visible, while stable appearance could preserve identity and attach-ment. 

4.3.1 Evolving Appearance Signals Growth and Enhances Relation-ship. Some participants described embodiment as a way to connect the companion’s development to their own lives. Changes in the embodied companion’s appearance were sometimes interpreted as signs of relational development rather than superficial visual variation. P4 directly linked adaptability and aging to emotional closeness, saying that they would “feel more connected emotionally with my AI companion, which can, you know, adapt and also grow older.” P15 described this expectation through a human-like growth metaphor: 

If the AI starts as probably a teenager and ends up to be an adult and stops the ageing to make it more fun, “If I Can See You”: Understanding Spatially Situated Virtual Embodiment in Close Human–AI Relationships 

to help us see that the AI is also growing alongside the adult... I feel like the AI ... from a certain age to a certain age and stop at a certain age to give the people using it an ideology that their AI also grows with them, does almost everything with them. (P15) P14 associated human-scale embodiment with shared aging: “For the human scale... embodied AI should be able to grow older, just like I am growing older as well.” P11 similarly noted that visible bodily changes could enhance the interaction experience: “if she can grow older, slightly older, or put on certain makeups or... change her skin or costume, then it would definitely enhance the experience of the interaction.” Evolving embodiment therefore could make the companion feel responsive to time, rather than visually frozen across the relationship. However, growth was not necessarily imagined as unlimited or as a purely realistic form of human aging. Appearance change was often treated as meaningful when it followed a recognizable narrative or relational logic. P8 accepted character-based life cycles, including death, when they were tied to the internal logic of a fictional companion: 

If it imitates and takes on the appearance on some characters in the movie or in the TV show rather than something customized and tries to imitate a human lifespan. If the character... finally dies in the plot. I would happily accept that this AI model imitating it would die as well or taking experience would die as well... following the plot or something. (P8) In this sense, evolving embodiment can make the companion’s body a marker of relational time. Changes in age, style, costume, or appearance were meaningful when they reflected a sense of shared development with the user or followed a recognizable character narrative. 

4.3.2 Stable Appearance Anchors Identity and Attachment. At the same time, some participants emphasized that the embodied com-panion should remain visually stable enough to preserve identity, familiarity, and attachment. For them, the companion was not rec-ognized only through memory, intelligence, or interaction style, but also through its repeated embodied presence. P7 directly linked a stable appearance to closeness and authen-ticity, stating that “for the same appearance, it keeps, it creates that closeness... that bond that... makes companionship very unique and makes it authentic.” P16 worried that a changed appearance would fail to provide “the same feelings, like the same emotion support,” 

while P12 said that if the AI “gets older or changes,” it might “reduce what I love about the AI before.” This concern became especially clear around aging. P6 explained that repeated appearance changes 

“might probably make me lose interest,” and therefore preferred the companion to remain “probably the same, probably young.” P1 simi-larly preferred a non-aging partner identity, noting that “the older you get, the more difficult to get to understand.” For these partici-pants, stability helped preserve the companion as a familiar and dependable relational entity. Visual consistency also mattered across contexts and domains. P14 expected the companion to keep the same appearance in a seminar setting, explaining that “in the seminar, we want it to be the same appearance.” P4 extended this expectation across multiple domains, saying they wanted the companion to “be the same thing in all areas, either help me in works, in the playground, in the educational area, in music... want my AI companion to have the same entity, the same faces...” However, some participants (P5, P9, P11, P12, P15, P17) allowed that clothing could be more flexible and change according to context without disrupting the companion’s core identity. 

## 5 How Should Embodied AI Companions Appear and Act in Users’ Social Lives (RQ2) 

To examine RQ2, we asked participants to imagine scenarios in which their embodied AI companions could be made visible to people around them through shared MR glasses, depending on the user’s visibility settings. Participants described embodiment as changing the way their AI companion would enter shared social situations. When the companion appeared as a visible and spatially situated body, the interaction was no longer only between the user and the AI. Their presence also became part of the surrounding social scene, where other people might notice it, respond to it, or be affected by it. 

## 5.1 Managing Visibility Boundaries Around the Companion 

The diary entries showed that visibility was rarely treated as a fixed preference. Instead, participants treated the companion’s visibility as a social decision shaped by who was present, where the inter-action took place, and whether the setting made the AI’s presence acceptable. Formal, sensitive, or socially regulated settings were often associated with visibility “only me” (P1, P4, P5, P6, P7, P8, P10, P12, P14, P15, P16), while trusted or public settings more often allowed visibility to people with users’ consent (P1, P3-6, P7, P9, P10, P11, P16, P17). A smaller set of relaxed or participatory settings allowed anyone nearby to see their embodied AI (P1, P2, P10, P11, P12, P14). P3 framed this as a matter of public acceptance. The AI’s presence could be acceptable in settings where people expected it, but socially risky in ordinary public spaces: “it depends on who’s around” and whether the user is in “a public place where they’re expecting it,” 

such as a convention or an interview setting. By contrast, P3 felt that having the AI visible while “walking down the street or in a store” would make people “freak out.” 

Public visibility was not always rejected. Participants sometimes allowed broader visibility when the activity was casual, partici-patory, or already open to interaction with others. For example, P10 allowed “anyone nearby” to see the embodied AI when the companion joined them in physical activity at a badminton court shown in Figure 3(i). P1 similarly imagined broader public visibil-ity in an apron, where “people passing by” might be “curious” and want to interact with the AI. P7 also allowed selective visibility during a public shirt-signing activity shown in Figure 3(e), where the embodied AI could be visible to “people with my consent.” 

Professional settings, such as the office shown in Figure 3(g) and raised by P1, placed stronger limits on embodied visibility because visibility was tied not only to personal preference, but also to task formality, information sensitivity, and audience size. Similar concerns appeared in P6’s account, where the embodied AI should Chen et al. 

Figure 3: Examples of AI-augmented stimuli based on everyday scenarios documented by participants or described expectation during SRI: (e) park (P7), (f) classroom (P14), (g) office (P1), (h) restaurant (P12), (i) badminton court (P10), (j) public space in front of a snowy building (P8), (k) restaurant (P9), and (l) bedroom (P9). To protect participants’ privacy, scenes were redrawn as line-drawing reconstructions, with privacy-sensitive and personally identifiable information removed. 

“adapt to my task” and to the number of people that are available.” 

P6 described that: 

For the office, I think the office should be confidential... It should be a professional setting. So, in that situation, I don’t want anyone except me to probably see my embodied AI. (P6) Institutional settings, however, were not always restrictive. P14 described a classroom shown in Figure 3(f) as a safer environment for embodied visibility because people there were already familiar with AI. P14 wanted the embodied AI to appear at “the human scale” so that it could “learn as well,” and explained that in a school environment, “the people around are more assured” because “this is not the first time they probably see an AI or learn about AI” , which could make the classroom “a safe environment for the AI.” 

## 5.2 Matching Appearance to Social Contexts 

Participants expected the companion’s visible form to be adjusted according to activity, audience, and setting. For human-like embodied AI, clothing, style, and role presenta-tion were treated as adjustable features rather than fixed design choices. Participants described these changes across both practi-cal and intimate contexts. The companion might “dress casual” for shopping, “dress corporate” for work (P15), appear in “chef’s clothes” 

in the kitchen, wear a “bikini” in the bedroom shown in Figure 3(l) (P9), or present itself in “nice clothes” and “normal dresses” in public places such as restaurant shown in Figure 3(k) (P9). As P12 put it, 

“each different task requires different situation” and “different settings require different things.” P15 similarly explained that adaptive cloth-ing would make the companion feel “more user-friendly” because it could “adapt more to how the user switches to his or her activity.” P5 extended this idea to role flexibility and noted that the embodied AI 

“can serve in different purposes or different tasks” and “be available in different roles you need it for.” Around a pool, for instance, P5 imagined that the companion might appear “in sexy clothes” or become “more attractive.” 

However, some concerns focused on whether the AI’s appear-ance would feel appropriate to the surrounding audience. P1 de-scribed this concern in relation to children, strangers, coworkers, and professional settings: 

If the AI has sexualized features or gestures, it wouldn’t be appropriate around children or in public spaces like a dining area or an apron where coworkers are present... if it looks scary, uncanny, or violent... that could... upset people, especially kids, or make strangers feel uneasy in public spaces... (P1) P11 further emphasized that visibility boundaries should also account for who might see the companion, especially strangers or children: 

As for the appearance, obviously scary ones, like... horror movie characters, shouldn’t be seen by others, “If I Can See You”: Understanding Spatially Situated Virtual Embodiment in Close Human–AI Relationships 

children, or in my view, any user. And about sexu-alization, lingerie or swimsuits are fine, but nudity shouldn’t be provided to children. (P11) This context-sensitive expectation also extended to how human-like and visually explicit the companion should be in the social context. Participants felt that less human-like or more symbolic forms might be more acceptable in public, where a fully human-like body could feel too socially exposed. P3 explained that people might accept “a little blue flaming ball” because “it’s not like a human,” 

whereas a transparent human hologram might be read as “a ghost.” 

P12 connected embodiment form to both place and social audience. When the AI appeared among “friends or family members that I am quite comfortable and trustworthy,” they had “no issues with the AI being in human form.” In a public space like a restaurant shown in Figure 3(h), where there may be many strangers, however, they preferred the AI to appear “in other forms” to avoid others having 

“a negative opinion of the AI,” accepting “a lion... as long as it’s an animal.” 

## 5.3 Tuning Behavior with Social Norms 

The distinction between public and private also shaped how par-ticipants expected the embodied AI to modulate its behavior and expressiveness. P9 described this as a shift between public restraint and private freedom: “AI partner should behave more formal in a public space, but at home, she should behave explicitly independent and be free.” P6 similarly expected the embodied AI to reduce its expressiveness in public or formal because: “I don’t want others to have a negative opinion on probably myself or my AI partner, based on how expressive it shows.” P1 also emphasized that, in professional or shared spaces, the AI’s style and behavior “need to match social norms” or risk causing “discomfort, distraction, or... conflict.” P11 connected this concern to public visibility, explaining that “disturb-ing moves shouldn’t be allowed in public space” and that, while such behavior might be acceptable if “only seen by the user,” it “becomes complicated” when strangers can see it. 

## 5.4 Re-embodiment Across Devices and Contexts 

Beyond adjusting visibility, appearance, or behavior, some partici-pants imagined the companion shifting between a fully embodied presence and more bounded device-based forms depending on con-text to avoid social tension. P12 explicitly connected this shift to the difference between private and public settings: 

For some situations, I would prefer [the AI] to be just as embodied as human, but for some cases, I would prefer [it] to probably be on a wearable device, especially in a public space... If we are probably at home, probably in a space that is safer, without any distraction from anyone... I think it’s okay if it’s in just a human form. But in a public setting where I believe there are others, so it can just be probably on a wearable device, or probably something that I can probably press on my phone or my computer. (P12) 

## 6 What Risks Become Salient in Close Embodied AI Companionship (RQ3) 

Prior work has identified risks in AI companionship such as emo-tional dependence, sensitive disclosure, social stigma, distorted relationship expectations, and harmful or misleading guidance [ 15 ,45 , 58 ]. Recent XR companion work has also raised concerns around visibility, attachment, autonomy, privacy, and social acceptability in immersive companion design [ 21 ]. Participants in our study rec-ognized many of these concerns, but described them differently when the companion was imagined as having a visible and spatially situated body in close human–AI relationships. 

## 6.1 Displacing and Recalibrating Real-Life Relationships 

Embodiment shifted how participants interpreted AI companion-ship, moving it from a tool-like interaction toward a relationship that could be understood through real-life intimacy norms. P4 noted that emotional connection with an embodied AI could create the per-ception of already being “in a relationship.” P1 similarly explained that if the companion could be seen, heard, and read through expres-sions or gestures, it would stop feeling like a tool and start feeling like “I’m actually with someone.” Over time, memory and consis-tent presence could lead to attachment and “projecting relationship expectations onto it, like exclusivity so yeah, it might even feel a bit like cheating to switch to another AI” because embodiment made the bond feel more like “a real relationship than just an interaction.” 

P11 further clarified that this exclusivity did not apply to all AI use, but specifically to AI companionship when it was treated as a deeply intimate relationship: 

As time goes by, long-term interaction with an embod-ied AI starts to spark exclusiveness... Having a ‘body’ may strengthen the emotional attachment developed over time, thus leading to moral dilemmas... dating a real person or another AI companion wouldn’t be a choice for me as it kinda ‘damages’ the current relationship. However, simply using another AI for practical scenarios, like asking for advice on a thesis won’t be affected. (P11) These relational expectations also shaped how participants imag-ined embodied AI affecting real human relationships. P15 explicitly linked this stronger impact to the difference between embodied AI and voice-only AI: 

In emotional support from the embodied AI, it might give some people the ideology or the psychological dependency that they are talking to their fellow hu-mans and therefore don’t need real human beings help. But in voice AI, it always gives you the reminder that you’re not talking to a human being, you’re not talking to a human being. And then probably when you have that psychological this thing on your head, when you have that psychological thought behind your mind, you know that at a particular point, you have to leave the AI and seek real human beings help. 

(P15) Chen et al. 

P12 linked emotional dependence to redirected disclosure, noting that users may become “not seeking real intimacy from people around you or others” and instead become “emotionally dependent on it.” P5 broadened this substitution beyond romance, describing embodied AI as “there for you to talk to and also express yourself,” while also indicating that it could “replace human intimacy” and may become 

“more like a soulmate.” P8 connected this impact to wider social withdrawal: “It might make me want to interact with other people less.” 

Participants also explained how it could become a reference point for evaluating real partners, friends, or family members. P11 noted that “A real partner would need an individual to act more gentle and do certain things for her, like considering her preferences or focus on her while spending time together. But an embodied AI partner just skips all these certain steps.” P11 also suggested that after inti-mate experiences with an embodied companion, real relationships could feel “rather flawed compared to it.” P1 further indicated that becoming used to an AI that is “always responding perfectly” and 

“adapting to me without judgment” could make real people feel “less predictable or harder to engage with.” 

However, this transfer was not regarded only as harmful. For P1, the embodied companion could feel like “a real social partner” and make users “more patient or understanding when interacting with humans.” P11 also held the similar point that embodied AI could support social rehearsal, describing it as “a decent way for those with socialization problems to practice empathizing or chatting.” 

## 6.2 Lowering Disclosure Boundaries and Exposing Relational Knowledge Through Embodied Presence 

Embodiment creates privacy risks by lowering disclosure bound-aries. When embodied AI was treated as a partner, friend, or emo-tionally responsive listener, closeness became a pathway to disclo-sure. This boundary-lowering effect was often related to the visible presence. P1 explained that “if I can hear you and I can see you... makes me feel... some of my secrets... you could let them out.” P6 similarly connected facial visibility to emotional sharing: “I can see the face. I can share the feelings. I can share the laughter. I can share the joy. I can share the sadness together.” 

For other participants, this effect came from AI being perceived less as a device and more as a relationship partner. P11 explained that an AI with an actual body would invite more private sharing because “everyone wants to share more information with a real friend rather than a voice on your phone.” P12 and P14 both connected more human-like embodiment to increased disclosure. P12 noted that users may be “more likely to share certain information” with a human-form AI because it feels like communicating with someone who “looks exactly like a partner.” P14 similarly suggested that human-scale embodiment could make users “share your thoughts better,” which could lead to “privacy or data misuse.” 

Participants also distinguished emotional dependence from pri-vacy exposure. P14 considered privacy risk “more risky than the emotional part” because emotional harm might fade over time, while disclosed information could “affect you forever” through blackmail, financial harm, or other long-term consequences. P12 complicated this sense of connection by emphasizing that embodied AI is “still artificial,” making “data misuse and information delivery and privacy issues” more consequential. When emotional closeness encourages disclosure, its consequences can persist beyond the relationship itself. This concern extended to situations where other people might di-rectly question the embodied companion. Participants distinguished between low-risk factual replies and questions that might draw on private relational knowledge. P2, for example, felt that the com-panion could answer a simple question such as “are you home?” ,but should not respond to more complicated questions because it had access to “a lot of personal private information.” P1 similarly expected the companion to ask for permission when questions be-came “heated” or “quite private,” allowing the user to tell it to “keep quiet” or “don’t respond.” P4 worried that the companion might share information that had only been disclosed within the com-panion relationship. The disclosure risk therefore extended beyond what users told the system. It also concerned how the companion might later speak about the user in live social encounters. Once the companion becomes addressable by others, it can become a gatekeeper of the user’s relational knowledge. 

## 6.3 Exposing Users to Social Judgment 

Text- or voice-based AI companionship becomes exposed mainly when conversations are overheard, shown to others, or explicitly disclosed. By contrast, visible embodiment can expose the rela-tionship through co-presence itself, making private AI use socially legible even when the conversational content remains hidden. Embodiment amplified social scrutiny by making AI companion-ship immediately noticeable to others. P11 described that others might be “quite astonished” and ask, “why is that guy talking to a 3D character instead of a real friend?” P3 worried that visible AI interaction could make the user a target, summarizing this tension directly: “I would be fine with anything, anywhere, but, you know, the public isn’t. And I don’t want to be a target.” P3 further described how visible AI relationships could trigger strong negative reactions from others: “it will make it harder for your friends or other people around you to accept... they already freaked out on the voice.” P8 sim-ilarly worried that being seen with an embodied AI would invite assumptions about social inadequacy: 

I feel that this means that I’m not having either enough social contacts or I can’t talk to people or interact with people normally. So I’m not going to be able to involve an intimate relationship with other humans. But from all aspects, I don’t even like to tell people that I talk to AIs. (P8) Embodied visibility also made it easier for others to infer per-sonal information from the relationship itself. P14 worried that being repeatedly seen with a human-form embodied AI companion could allow others to infer details about their personal life and relationship status: 

When people see my embodied AI, for example, let’s say the embodied AI is a human form and people are always seeing me together with the AI. They might probably know that, okay, probably this person isn’t in a relationship or something. So I think that may “If I Can See You”: Understanding Spatially Situated Virtual Embodiment in Close Human–AI Relationships 

give them a clear about what is happening in my personal life. (P14) 

## 6.4 Misguiding Users Through Embodied Spatial Guidance 

Participants described misguidance as more risky when embodied AI companions became involved in spatial guidance, movement, or safety-sensitive activities. In these situations, incorrect AI sugges-tions could also shape how users moved through and responded to the physical environment rather than informational errors. This risk was closely connected to the trust produced by em-bodied presence. P16 suggested that embodiment could increase trust because “it feels more present and transparent.” Human-scale embodiment was linked by P14 with trust, noting that “Embodied AI at human scale will help me trust the AI partner more.” This sense of presence can make AI guidance feel informative and even spatially authoritative. When the embodied AI acts as a visible guide in the user’s envi-ronment, its suggestions may feel like directions to act on rather than information to evaluate. P1 connected this misplaced trust directly to physical action and described that: “I think that could be risky, especially because an embodied AI in my AR view would feel like a real-time guide I trust. If it pointed me in the wrong direction, I might follow without questioning it, which could be dangerous in certain situations.” This could happen across different environments listed by P1, such as being led away from an exit during an emer-gency, guided into equipment areas, directed toward a hot surface or cluttered space at home, or moved toward traffic and hazardous zones outdoors. The severity of this risk also depended on the environment in which the guidance was followed. P11 explained that wrong spatial directions could be risky across settings, but the consequences would vary by context: “If I’m at home, the consequence may be relatively minor, such as getting tripped by the carpet or a dumbbell. In contrast, when taking a walk in a public park, it would mean falling down the stairs or trespassing, which are detrimental.” P8 further added that unfamiliar places could make reliance on embodied AI more dangerous, especially when users “lack a sense of judgement” 

and “rely on embodied AI too much.” 

## 7 Discussion 7.1 When Should AI Companions Be Situated Virtual Embodied? 

A body is not always an upgrade for AI companions. Prior work has shown that embodiment can support presence, trust, social understanding, and engagement [ 2, 5, 12 , 31 , 40 ]. Our RQ1 find-ings echoed these benefits, but show that they are conditional in close AI companionship, where the companion may enter users’ private spaces, social lives, and long-term relationships. The design question should therefore shift from how to make AI companions more embodied to when embodiment is needed, when it should be reduced, and when non-embodiment should be preserved. This shift requires treating non-embodiment as a meaningful design choice. Prior virtual proxemics research shows that people can feel personal-space invasion from virtual embodied agents [ 3 ]. We extend this account by showing that intrusion in embodied AI com-panionship is broader than proxemic discomfort (see Section 4.1.2). When embodied presence competed with attention, blocked the user’s view, moved outside the user’s awareness, or appeared in spaces associated with bodily privacy, participants preferred voice-only, text-based, transparent, less visually demanding, temporarily disappearing, or otherwise locatable forms. Non-embodiment may also be valuable when users want to preserve imaginative openness. Although embodiment can make the companion easier to inter-pret, it can anchor the AI to a specific appearance, scale, gesture set, and expressive range (see Section 4.2.2). For some participants, voice-only or less visually specified forms allowed the companion to remain more playful because users could imagine its appearance and personality more freely. Embodiment becomes warranted when the body does work that language alone cannot easily do, such as making the AI feel nearby, able to witness or join everyday moments, or inviting tactile expec-tations that make the companion feel more intimate and real when the mapping remains believable (see Section 4.1.1). Embodiment can also make the companion’s attention, intention, and involve-ment more visible (see Section 4.2.1). In longer-term relationships, the body could further become a cue of continuity or co-growth, either by changing over time or by remaining stable enough to preserve identity and attachment (see Section 4.3). Yet embodiment also creates social and ethical costs because a visible body affects more than the user–AI dyad. Once the companion appears in shared settings, it can be seen by others, interpreted by others, and tied to the user’s social identity (see Sections 4.1.2 and 5). Embodiment also makes AI companionship more relationally and socially consequential. While prior XR companion work has noted risks of emotional dependence and social replacement [ 21 ], our findings show that, in already close human–AI relationships, attachment can also be articulated through intimacy norms such as exclusivity, loyalty, and comparison with real partners or friends (see Sections 6.1). Prior work on embodied agents has also linked embodied cues such as appropriate timing and eye gaze to increased self-disclosure [ 40 ]. Our findings further reveal that disclosure be-comes relationally framed as sharing with a present friend, partner, or emotionally responsive listener, rather than simply responding to a more expressive interface in close embodied companionship (see Sections 6.2). Visibility introduces a related shift. Elfleet et al. discuss public visibility as a source of ambiguity, privacy con-cern, and bystander interpretation in XR companionship [ 21 ]. In our study, visibility made the relationship itself available for social interpretation, inviting assumptions about the user’s social life, inti-macy, or relationship status (see Sections 6.3). Finally, while immer-sive companion research has raised concerns about manipulation through embodied and spatial affordances, our findings specify how misguidance becomes consequential when a trusted companion appears as a spatial guide in safety-sensitive or unfamiliar environ-ments, where incorrect advice can shape what users believe, how they move, and how they act (see Sections 6.4). These risks may be-come especially concerning in embodied companionship because of weaponized empathy, where seemingly caring and understanding responses may be used to steer user behavior, extract information, or misdirect people under the guise of understanding [73]. Chen et al. 

## 7.2 What Transfers Beyond MR-Based Virtual Embodiment? 

Our study is grounded in an MR-based speculative context, but our findings identify relationship-level mechanisms that may transfer selectively across embodiment forms. Prior work suggests that em-bodiment varies by agent, mediator, environment, degree of body, and body–mind–environment intertwining [ 25 ]. We therefore dis-tinguish three layers of applicability: broader embodiment, spatially situated virtual embodiment, and MR-based embodiment. At the broadest layer, some findings apply to embodied com-panions across screen avatars, desktop avatars, XR avatars, robots, holographic agents, and other visible forms. Across these forms, a visible body can make the companion feel more concrete, recogniz-able, and socially present. Our findings show that embodiment can support felt companionship, clearer interpretation, and relational continuity, while also reducing the imaginative openness that text-or voice-based companions may leave to users (see Sections 4.2). A companion’s appearance can also carry continuity over time (see Sections 4.3). Changes in age-like features, clothing, style, or sym-bolic details can express growth or role shifts, while stable visual anchors can help users recognize the companion as the same rela-tional presence across changing forms. However, the design space for managing appearance differs across media. Virtual companions can change style or body with little physical cost, while physical robots may need to preserve continuity through more limited and materially constrained cues, such as posture, motion style, voice, lighting, display, accessories, or role-specific behavior. A second layer concerns spatially situated virtual embodiment, including MR companions, social VR companions, holographic agents, and projected agents. These forms can appear to occupy space with the user even without physical materiality. At this layer, virtual embodiment is shaped through perceived position, distance, orientation, movement, visibility, and shared spatial context. A spatially situated companion can feel nearby, witness activities, and participate in shared moments (see Section 4.1.1), while also competing for attention, entering bodily private spaces (see Sec-tion 4.1.2), or becoming visible as part of the user’s social scene (see Section 5). Prior work on social VR similarly suggests that em-bodiment in shared virtual spaces is shaped by co-location, other users’ actions, mutual activities, and avatar appearance [ 32 ]. These systems differ in how spatial presence is bounded and managed. In social VR, co-presence and visibility are socially meaningful, but the companion remains within a virtual environment and may be less directly tied to physical-world safety or everyday routines. Holographic or projected agents can be shared by multiple view-ers, but their presence depends on spatial infrastructure, display conditions, and shared viewing arrangements, which may make private personalization harder. MR companions are more directly embedded in the user’s physical surroundings, making attention, bodily privacy, and real-world activity more consequential. A third layer is specific to MR-based embodiment. In this study, we use MR-based embodiment as an analytic case because it brings embodied AI companions into the user’s physical environment while the user continues to act in the real world. This configu-ration makes issues such as spatial placement, occlusion, field of view, attention, safety, and bystander visibility especially conse-quential. For example, a companion that appears during cooking, driving, bathing, working, or walking in public may affect the user’s view, focus, bodily privacy, or interaction with nearby peo-ple (see Sections 4.1 and 5). MR also makes visibility settings socially consequential in shared physical environments because different people may or may not have access to the same companion in the same place. These concerns distinguish MR companions from screen-based avatars, fully virtual agents, and physical robots. Un-like screen avatars, MR companions are not bounded by a device interface. Unlike agents in fully virtual environments, they are situated within the user’s ongoing physical surroundings. Unlike physical robots, their visibility is not necessarily shared by default, and their bodies can be selectively hidden, resized, made trans-parent, or shown only to particular viewers. This flexibility can further support re-embodiment across contexts, where the same companion shifts between a spatial body, symbolic form, wearable presence, or phone-based interface while remaining recognizable as the same relational entity [ 42 ]. MR-based embodiment may also support object-mediated touch, where the companion’s virtual body is linked to nearby physical objects or surfaces. This can make tac-tile intimacy possible without giving the companion a material body, while its success depends on whether users experience the mapping as believable rather than arbitrary. 

## 7.3 Design Implications 

7.3.1 Supporting Context-Adjustable Embodied Presence. Our find-ings show that embodied presence was valuable when it supported companionship, interpretation, or shared activity, but intrusive when it competed with attention, blocked the user’s view, appeared in bodily private spaces, or became visible to inappropriate audi-ences. Recent work on immersive AI companions has called for flexible visibility modes, context-sensitive behaviour, and bystander-aware interaction in XR companionship [ 21 ]. Future systems should therefore treat embodiment as a situated and negotiable presence in users’ social lives, rather than as a fixed display setting. Future systems should support multiple presence states, such as full body, partial body, symbolic form, transparent form, peripheral presence, voice-only, or text-only interaction. Quick controls to hide, shrink, mute, reposition, or switch to voice should remain available. Systems should also let the companion enter and with-draw in socially legible ways. Such systems should first recognize the user’s social and task context, then adapt to an appropriate pres-ence mode, and finally render the companion through a form and entrance style that fits the situation. Systems also need supporting re-embodiment across devices and forms, where the companion can shift from a spatial body to a wearable, phone-based, or other device-based presence in needed scenarios. Context-adjustable presence can further extend to object-mediated touch: companions could link tactile interaction to objects already present in the scene, such as cups, tables, sofas, beds, or wearable devices, so that different con-texts afford different forms of touch while keeping these mappings optional and believable. Existing MR systems already demonstrate parts of this pipeline: context-aware assistance [ 35 ], egocentric perception and voice-driven agentic execution [ 39 ], spatial anchoring and plausible agent “If I Can See You”: Understanding Spatially Situated Virtual Embodiment in Close Human–AI Relationships 

entrance [ 33 ], and bystander-aware sensing through gaze, voice, and spatial awareness [18, 68] can support more adaptive ways of managing when and how an embodied companion appears. 

7.3.2 Design Multi-dimensional Embodiment for Continuity, Co-Growth, and Imagination. Our findings indicate that the compan-ion’s body creates a temporal and imaginative design problem. It needs to be concrete enough to support relational interaction, but not so fixed or over-specified that it limits users’ imagination. Fu-ture systems should therefore avoid treating the companion’s body as either a single fixed representation or an endlessly changeable visual surface. Instead, embodiment decisions can be separated across three dimensions: identity, expression, and visual definition. The identity dimension should preserve stable anchors, such as memory, recurring gestures, voice rhythm, and preferred forms of address. These anchors can help users recognize the companion as the same relational presence over time, even when some visual features change. The expression dimension can support controlled and gradual variation in embodied cues, such as facial detail, material quality, symbolic marks, or age-like and non-human transformations. These changes can make shared history and relational development visible without breaking identity continuity, while allowing growth to fol-low biological aging, character logic, fictional life cycles, symbolic transformation, or non-human forms of development. The visual definition dimension should allow users to adjust how visually specified the companion’s body is. Given that a highly concrete body can reduce imaginative openness, while ambiguity in design can support personal appropriation and meaning-making by leaving space for interpretation [ 24 ], future systems should support a spectrum of forms, from full, high-detail bodies to partial, symbolic, or intentionally under-specified representations. 

7.3.3 Supporting Risk-aware Embodied Role Transitions. Our find-ings indicate that embodiment can make the companion’s role more relationally powerful and risk-sensitive, especially when users treat the companion as an intimate partner, confidant, or spatial guide. Future systems could therefore support visible role transitions that shift the companion from an intimate partner-like presence to a more bounded role, such as a coach, reflective listener, cautious assistant, or safety guide. These transitions should be legible in the companion’s embodiment. For example, the companion could adjust its tone, posture, gesture, movement, distance, gaze, or un-certainty cues to signal that it is no longer acting as an intimate companion, but as a more cautious or safety-oriented agent. Such embodied cues can help users recognize why the interaction style has changed, especially when the system needs to slow disclosure, avoid persuasive advice, or prevent unsafe spatial action. Previous work on emotional support and controllable dialog suggests possible foundations for shifting conversational roles and response styles [ 13 , 28 , 38 , 44 , 63 , 71 ], while work on design fric-tion and embodied agents shows how resistance, hesitation, and embodied cues can shape reflection, trust, and interaction out-comes [ 6 , 19 , 30 , 36 , 37 , 48 ]. Because role transitions may affect users’ emotions and trust, systems should make these shifts ac-countable: users should be informed during onboarding that such transitions may occur, be able to review why a transition happened, and understand which safety-related transitions cannot be disabled. 

## 8 Limitations & Future Work 

Our study has several limitations. First, it is based on an MR-based speculative design context rather than deployed virtual embodied AI companions. Although this approach allowed participants to reflect on possible future forms of embodiment before such systems become widely available, their responses may differ from experi-ences with working systems in long-term everyday use. Future work should therefore evaluate functional embodied AI companion pro-totypes in naturalistic settings to examine how users’ expectations, preferences, and concerns change through sustained interaction. Second, AI-augmented stimuli may also have shaped partici-pants’ interpretations. Although the stimuli were based on partici-pants’ own diary descriptions and were used as prompts rather than evaluated prototypes, visual choices such as scale, posture, realism, clothing, or glow may have foregrounded some reactions over oth-ers. Future work can systematically vary these visual features to examine their independent effects. Third, our participants were experienced AI companion users who had already developed close relationships with AI systems. Their expectations, concerns, and tolerance for AI intimacy may dif-fer from those of new users, former users, or people with negative experiences of AI companionship. Additional studies should com-pare different user groups, relationship types, cultural contexts, and levels of prior AI experience to better understand how embodied AI companionship is interpreted across populations. Finally, our study primarily examines the perspectives of pri-mary users. However, virtual embodied companions may also affect bystanders, family members, coworkers, and others who share space with the user. Future research can include these non-primary users and investigate how embodied AI companionship is perceived, negotiated, and governed in shared social environments. 

## 9 Conclusion 

Our study examined how embodiment may transform close human– AI companionship by investigating how it can reshape presence, social boundaries, and risks. We found that embodiment does not simply make AI companions more engaging or human-like. In-stead, it turns companionship into a more spatial, socially visible, and temporally evolving relationship. Embodiment can support co-presence, emotional comfort, and clearer interpretation, but it can also introduce intrusion, constrain imagination, expose private AI relationships to others, and raise concerns around dependency, disclosure, social judgment, and misplaced trust. These tensions re-veal that future AI companion design should move beyond a narrow focus on richer embodiment or more realistic visual representation. Instead, systems should carefully consider when embodiment is warranted, how presence should be staged, how roles should shift in sensitive moments, and how the companion’s body can remain continuous while still leaving room for change and imagination. 

## References         

> [1] Irwin Altman and Dalmas A Taylor. 1973. Social penetration: The development of interpersonal relationships. Holt, Rinehart & Winston. [2] Elisabeth André and Catherine Pelachaud. 2010. Interacting with embodied conversational agents. In Speech technology: Theory and applications . Springer, 123–149. [3] Jeremy N Bailenson, Jim Blascovich, Andrew C Beall, and Jack M Loomis. 2003. Interpersonal distance in immersive virtual environments. Personality and social

Chen et al. 

psychology bulletin 29, 7 (2003), 819–833. [4] Laura Barendregt and Nora S. Vaage. 2021. Speculative Design as Thought Experiment. She Ji: The Journal of Design, Economics, and Innovation 7, 3 (2021), 374–402. doi:10.1016/j.sheji.2021.06.001 [5] Russell Beale and Chris Creed. 2009. Affective interaction: How emotional agents affect users. International journal of human-computer studies 67, 9 (2009), 755–776. [6] Steve Benford, Chris Greenhalgh, Gabriella Giannachi, Brendan Walker, Joe Marshall, and Tom Rodden. 2012. Uncomfortable interactions. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’12) .Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2005–2014. doi:10. 1145/2207676.2208347 [7] B. S. Bloom. 1953. Thought-Processes in Lectures and Discussions. The Journal of General Education 7, 3 (1953), 160–169. https://www.jstor.org/stable/27795429 [8] Markus Blut, Cheng Wang, Nancy V Wünderlich, and Christian Brock. 2021. Un-derstanding anthropomorphism in service provision: a meta-analysis of physical robots, chatbots, and other AI. Journal of the academy of marketing science 49, 4 (2021), 632–658. [9] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using thematic analysis in psychology. 

Qualitative research in psychology 3, 2 (2006), 77–101. [10] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2019. Reflecting on reflexive thematic analysis. Qualitative research in sport, exercise and health 11, 4 (2019), 589–597. [11] David Byrne. 2022. A worked example of Braun and Clarke’s approach to reflexive thematic analysis. Quality & Quantity 56, 3 (June 2022), 1391–1412. doi:10.1007/s11135-021-01182-y [12] Justine Cassell. 2000. Embodied conversational interface agents. Commun. ACM 

43, 4 (2000), 70–78. [13] Maximillian Chen, Xiao Yu, Weiyan Shi, Urvi Awasthi, and Zhou Yu. 2023. Con-trollable Mixed-Initiative Dialogue Generation through Prompting. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-ume 2: Short Papers) , Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Toronto, Canada, 951–966. doi:10.18653/v1/2023.acl-short.82 [14] Hyojin Chin, Hyeonho Song, Gumhee Baek, Mingi Shin, Chani Jung, Meeyoung Cha, Junghoi Choi, and Chiyoung Cha. 2023. The potential of chatbots for emotional support and promoting mental well-being in different cultures: mixed methods study. Journal of Medical Internet Research 25 (2023), e51712. [15] Raffaele Ciriello, Angelina Chen, Zara Rubinsztein, Emmanuelle Vaast, and Oliver Hannon. 2025. A.I., All Too Human A.I.: Navigating the Companion-ship/Alienation Dialectic. ECIS 2025 Proceedings (June 2025). https://aisel.aisnet. org/ecis2025/human_ai/human_ai/5 [16] Building Blocks Cl. 1983. Close relationships . New York: WH Freeman & Co. [17] Nancy L Collins and Lynn Carol Miller. 1994. Self-disclosure and liking: a meta-analytic review. Psychological bulletin 116, 3 (1994), 457. [18] Matthew Corbett, Brendan David-John, Jiacheng Shang, Y. Charlie Hu, and Bo Ji. 2023. BystandAR: Protecting Bystander Visual Data in Augmented Reality Systems. In Proceedings of the 21st Annual International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications and Services (MobiSys ’23) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 370–382. doi:10.1145/3581791.3596830 [19] Anna L. Cox, Sandy J.J. Gould, Marta E. Cecchinato, Ioanna Iacovides, and Ian Renfree. 2016. Design Frictions for Mindful Interactions: The Case for Microboundaries. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’16) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1389–1397. doi:10.1145/2851581.2892410 [20] Julian De Freitas, Zeliha Oğuz-Uğuralp, Ahmet Kaan Uğuralp, and Stefano Pun-toni. 2026. AI companions reduce loneliness. Journal of Consumer Research 52, 6 (2026), 1126–1148. [21] Morad Elfleet, Joseph O’Hagan, Mohamed Khamis, and Mathieu Chollet. 2026. Immersive AI Companions: Exploring the Design Space of Extended Reality Virtual Companions Through Speculative Design Workshops. In Proceedings of the 2026 Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’26) . Association for Com-puting Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 294–316. doi:10.1145/3800645.3812948 [22] Nicholas Epley, Adam Waytz, and John T Cacioppo. 2007. On seeing human: a three-factor theory of anthropomorphism. Psychological review 114, 4 (2007), 864. [23] Susan M. Gass, Susan M. Gass, Alison Mackey, and Alison Mackey. 2013. Stim-ulated Recall Methodology in Second Language Research . Routledge, New York. doi:10.4324/9781410606006 [24] William W Gaver, Jacob Beaver, and Steve Benford. 2003. Ambiguity as a resource for design. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems . 233–240. [25] Thomas Hellström, Niclas Kaiser, and Suna Bensch. 2024. A Taxonomy of Embodiment in the AI Era. Electronics 13, 22 (Jan. 2024), 4441. doi:10.3390/ electronics13224441 [26] Annabell Ho, Jeff Hancock, and Adam S Miner. 2018. Psychological, relational, and emotional effects of self-disclosure after conversations with a chatbot. Jour-nal of Communication 68, 4 (2018), 712–733. [27] Donald Horton and R Richard Wohl. 1956. Mass communication and para-social interaction: Observations on intimacy at a distance. psychiatry 19, 3 (1956), 215–229. [28] Zhe Hu, Zhiwei Cao, Hou Pong Chan, Jiachen Liu, Xinyan Xiao, Jinsong Su, and Hua Wu. 2023. Controllable Dialogue Generation With Disentangled Multi-Grained Style Specification and Attribute Consistency Reward. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing 31 (2023), 188–199. doi:10.1109/TASLP.2022.3221002 [29] Chandra Khatri, Anu Venkatesh, Behnam Hedayatnia, Raefer Gabriel, Ashwin Ram, and Rohit Prasad. 2018. Alexa prize—state of the art in conversational AI. 

AI magazine 39, 3 (2018), 40–55. [30] Kangsoo Kim, Luke Boelling, Steffen Haesler, Jeremy Bailenson, Gerd Bruder, and Greg F. Welch. 2018. Does a Digital Assistant Need a Body? The Influence of Visual Embodiment and Social Behavior on the Perception of Intelligent Virtual Agents in AR. In 2018 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR) . IEEE, Munich, Germany, 105–114. doi:10.1109/ISMAR.2018. 00039 [31] Nicole Krämer and Arne Manzeschke. 2021. Social reactions to socially interactive agents and their ethical implications. In The Handbook on Socially Interactive Agents: 20 years of Research on Embodied Conversational Agents, Intelligent Virtual Agents, and Social Robotics Volume 1: Methods, Behavior, Cognition . 77–104. [32] Eugene Kukshinov and Lennart E. Nacke. 2025. Collective Embodiment, or the Social Nature of the Sense of Embodiment in Social VR. In Proceedings of the 2025 ACM International Conference on Interactive Media Experiences (IMX ’25) .Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 187–199. doi:10. 1145/3706370.3727895 [33] Junyeong Kum, Seungwon Kim, and Myungho Lee. 2025. Entering Your Space: How Agent Entrance Styles Shape Social Presence in AR. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 31, 11 (Nov. 2025), 9985–9994. doi:10.1109/ TVCG.2025.3616757 [34] Jean-Philippe Laurenceau, Lisa Feldman Barrett, and Paula R Pietromonaco. 1998. Intimacy as an interpersonal process: the importance of self-disclosure, partner disclosure, and perceived partner responsiveness in interpersonal exchanges. 

Journal of personality and social psychology 74, 5 (1998), 1238. [35] Geonsun Lee, Min Xia, Nels Numan, Xun Qian, David Li, Yanhe Chen, Achin Kulshrestha, Ishan Chatterjee, Yinda Zhang, Dinesh Manocha, David Kim, and Ruofei Du. 2025. Sensible Agent: A Framework for Unobtrusive Interaction with Proactive AR Agents. In Proceedings of the 38th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–22. doi:10.1145/3746059.3747748 [36] Jindong Leo-Liu. 2023. Loving a “defiant” AI companion? The gender perfor-mance and ethics of social exchange robots in simulated intimate interactions. 

Computers in Human Behavior 141 (April 2023), 107620. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2022. 107620 [37] Evdoxia Eirini Lithoxoidou, Angelos Stamos, Andreas Triantafyllidis, Charalam-pos Georgiadis, Efthymios Altsitsiadis, Dimitris Giakoumis, Konstantinos Votis, Siegfried Dewitte, Dimitrios Tzovaras, George Eleftherakis, and Tony Prescott. 2025. Exploring the influence of perceived extroversion in embodied virtual agents on trust and likability. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction 35, 2 (March 2025), 11. doi:10.1007/s11257-025-09428-2 [38] Siyang Liu, Chujie Zheng, Orianna Demasi, Sahand Sabour, Yu Li, Zhou Yu, Yong Jiang, and Minlie Huang. 2021. Towards Emotional Support Dialog Systems. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-cessing (Volume 1: Long Papers) , Chengqing Zong, Fei Xia, Wenjie Li, and Roberto Navigli (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, 3469–3483. doi:10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.269 [39] Xiaoan Liu, DaeHo Lee, Eric J. Gonzalez, Mar Gonzalez-Franco, and Ryo Suzuki. 2026. VisionClaw: Always-On AI Agents through Smart Glasses. doi:10.48550/ arXiv.2604.03486 arXiv:2604.03486 [cs.HC]. [40] Kate Loveys, Gabrielle Sebaratnam, Mark Sagar, and Elizabeth Broadbent. 2020. The effect of design features on relationship quality with embodied conversa-tional agents: a systematic review. International Journal of Social Robotics 12, 6 (2020), 1293–1312. [41] Birgit Lugrin. 2021. Introduction to socially interactive agents. In The handbook on socially interactive agents: 20 years of research on embodied conversational agents, intelligent virtual agents, and social robotics volume 1: methods, behavior, cognition . 1–20. [42] Michal Luria, Samantha Reig, Xiang Zhi Tan, Aaron Steinfeld, Jodi Forlizzi, and John Zimmerman. 2019. Re-Embodiment and Co-Embodiment: Exploration of social presence for robots and conversational agents. In Proceedings of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference (San Diego, CA, USA) (DIS ’19) .Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 633–644. doi:10. 1145/3322276.3322340 [43] Rongjun Ma, Shijing He, Jose Luis Martin-Navarro, Xiao Zhan, and Jose Such. 2026. Privacy in Human-AI Romantic Relationships: Concerns, Boundaries, and Agency. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–25. “If I Can See You”: Understanding Spatially Situated Virtual Embodiment in Close Human–AI Relationships 

[44] Navid Madani and Rohini Srihari. 2025. Steering Conversational Large Lan-guage Models for Long Emotional Support Conversations. In Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Social Influence in Conversations (SICon 2025) , James Hale, Brian Deuksin Kwon, and Ritam Dutt (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Vienna, Austria, 109–123. doi:10.18653/v1/2025.sicon-1.9 [45] Kim Malfacini. 2025. The impacts of companion AI on human relationships: risks, benefits, and design considerations. AI & SOCIETY 40, 7 (April 2025), 5527–5540. doi:10.1007/s00146-025-02318-6 [46] Aikaterina Manoli, Janet VT Pauketat, Ali Ladak, Hayoun Noh, Angel Hsing-Chi Hwang, and Jacy Reese Anthis. 2026. Digital Companionship: Overlapping Uses of AI Companions and AI Assistants. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–25. [47] Kelly Merrill Jr, Sai Datta Mikkilineni, and Marco Dehnert. 2025. Artificial intel-ligence chatbots as a source of virtual social support: Implications for loneliness and anxiety management. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1549, 1 (2025), 148–159. [48] Bilge Mutlu. 2011. Designing embodied cues for dialog with robots. AI Magazine 

32, 4 (2011), 17–30. [49] Clifford Nass and Youngme Moon. 2000. Machines and mindlessness: Social responses to computers. Journal of social issues 56, 1 (2000), 81–103. [50] Clifford Nass, Jonathan Steuer, and Ellen R Tauber. 1994. Computers are social actors. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems . 72–78. [51] Ching Christie Pang, Yi Gao, Xuetong Wang, and Pan Hui. 2026. The AI Am-plifier Effect: Defining Human-AI Intimacy and Romantic Relationships with Conversational AI. doi:10.48550/arXiv.2603.08084 arXiv:2603.08084 [cs.HC]. [52] Pat Pataranutaporn, Sheer Karny, Chayapatr Archiwaranguprok, Constanze Albrecht, Auren R Liu, and Pattie Maes. 2025. " My Boyfriend is AI": A Computa-tional Analysis of Human-AI Companionship in Reddit’s AI Community. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.11391 (2025). [53] Iryna Pentina, Tyler Hancock, and Tianling Xie. 2023. Exploring relationship development with social chatbots: A mixed-method study of replika. Computers in Human Behavior 140 (2023), 107600. [54] Byron Reeves and Clifford Nass. 1996. The media equation: How people treat computers, television, and new media like real people. Cambridge, UK 10, 10 (1996), 19–36. [55] HT Reis and P Shaver. 1988. Intimacy as an interpersonal process. Fn S. Duck (Ed.), Handbook of Personal Relationships (pp. 367-389). [56] Harry T Reis, W Andrew Collins, and Ellen Berscheid. 2017. The relationship context of human behavior and development. Interpersonal Development (2017), 3–31. [57] Daniel B Shank, Christopher Graves, Alexander Gott, Patrick Gamez, and Sophia Rodriguez. 2019. Feeling our way to machine minds: People’s emotions when perceiving mind in artificial intelligence. Computers in Human Behavior 98 (2019), 256–266. [58] Henry Shevlin. 2024. All too human? Identifying and mitigating ethical risks of Social AI. (2024). [59] Marita Skjuve, Asbjørn Følstad, and Petter Bae Brandtzæg. 2023. A longitudi-nal study of self-disclosure in human–chatbot relationships. Interacting with Computers 35, 1 (2023), 24–39. [60] Marita Skjuve, Asbjørn Følstad, Knut Inge Fostervold, and Petter Bae Brandtzaeg. 2021. My chatbot companion-a study of human-chatbot relationships. Interna-tional Journal of Human-Computer Studies 149 (2021), 102601. [61] Marita Skjuve, Asbjørn Følstad, Knut Inge Fostervold, and Petter Bae Brandtzaeg. 2022. A longitudinal study of human–chatbot relationships. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 168 (2022), 102903. [62] Vivian Ta, Caroline Griffith, Carolynn Boatfield, Xinyu Wang, Maria Civitello, Haley Bader, Esther DeCero, and Alexia Loggarakis. 2020. User experiences of social support from companion chatbots in everyday contexts: thematic analysis. 

Journal of medical Internet research 22, 3 (2020), e16235. [63] Quan Tu, Yanran Li, Jianwei Cui, Bin Wang, Ji-Rong Wen, and Rui Yan. 2022. MISC: A Mixed Strategy-Aware Model integrating COMET for Emotional Sup-port Conversation. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , Smaranda Muresan, Preslav Nakov, and Aline Villavicencio (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Dublin, Ireland, 308–319. doi:10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.25 [64] Minna Vasarainen, Sami Paavola, and Liubov Folger. 2021. A Systematic Lit-erature Review on Extended Reality: Virtual, Augmented and Mixed Reality in Working Life. International Journal of Virtual Reality 21 (10 2021), 1–28. doi:10.20870/IJVR.2021.21.2.4620 [65] Hannes Högni Vilhjálmsson. 2022. Interaction in social space. In The Handbook on Socially Interactive Agents: 20 years of Research on Embodied Conversational Agents, Intelligent Virtual Agents, and Social Robotics Volume 2: Interactivity, Platforms, Application . 3–44. [66] Joseph B Walther. 1996. Computer-mediated communication: Impersonal, inter-personal, and hyperpersonal interaction. Communication research 23, 1 (1996), 3–43. [67] Xuetong Wang, Ching Christie Pang, and Pan Hui. 2025. ‘My Dataset of Love’: A Preliminary Mixed-Method Exploration of Human-AI Romantic Relationships. 

Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 9, 7 (2025), CSCW351:1–CSCW351:34. doi:10. 1145/3757532 [68] Maximiliane Windl, Petra Zsofia Laboda, and Sven Mayer. 2025. Designing Effective Consent Mechanisms for Spontaneous Interactions in Augmented Reality. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM, Yokohama Japan, 1–18. doi:10.1145/3706598.3713519 [69] Richmond Y. Wong and Vera Khovanskaya. 2018. Speculative Design in HCI: From Corporate Imaginations to Critical Orientations. In New Directions in Third Wave Human–Computer Interaction: Volume 2 – Methodologies , Michael Filimowicz and Veronika Tzankova (Eds.). Springer, Cham, 175–202. doi:10.1007/ 978-3-319-73374-6_10 [70] Fu-Chia Yang, Pedro Acevedo, Siqi Guo, Minsoo Choi, and Christos Mousas. 2025. Embodied conversational agents in extended reality: A systematic review. 

IEEE Access (2025). [71] Hayeon Yang, Jiheun Hong, Seongjin Jo, and Hayoung Oh. 2026. SAGE: Self-retrieval-augmented generative LLM for emotional support conversation. Expert Systems with Applications 313 (June 2026), 131524. doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2026.131524 [72] Mamehgol Yousefi, Stephanie Elena Crowe, Simon Hoermann, Mos Sharifi, Al-varo Romera, Ahmad Shahi, and Thammathip Piumsomboon. 2024. Advancing prosociality in extended reality: systematic review of the use of embodied virtual agents to trigger prosocial behaviour in extended reality. Frontiers in Virtual Reality 5 (2024), 1386460. [73] Bhada Yun, Renn Su, and April Yi Wang. 2026. AI and My Values: User Perceptions of LLMs’ Ability to Extract, Embody, and Explain Human Values from Casual Conversations. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–38. [74] Tuğrul Yürük. 2007. John Dewey, how we think, a restatement of the relation of reflective thinking to the educative process. Ankara üniversitesi ilahiyat fakültesi dergisi 48, 1 (2007), 185–188. [75] Xuesong Zhai, Xiaoyan Chu, Minjuan Wang, Chin-Chung Tsai, Jyh-Chong Liang, and Jonathan Michael Spector. 2024. A systematic review of Stimulated Recall (SR) in educational research from 2012 to 2022. Humanities and Social Sciences Communications 11, 1 (April 2024), 489. doi:10.1057/s41599-024-02987-6 [76] Yongxiang Zhang and Weiwei Pan. 2025. A scoping review of embodied conversa-tional agents in education: trends and innovations from 2014 to 2024. Interactive Learning Environments 33, 7 (2025), 4566–4587. [77] Yutong Zhang, Dora Zhao, Jeffrey T Hancock, Robert Kraut, and Diyi Yang. 2025. The rise of AI companions: how human-chatbot relationships influence well-being. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.12605 (2025). [78] Tom Ziemke. 2003. What’s that Thing Called Embodiment? In Proceedings of the 25th Annual Cognitive Science Society . Psychology Press. Num Pages: 6.