Title: A Framework for Measuring Appropriate Reliance on Set-Valued AI Advice

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.06081v1

Published Time: Fri, 05 Jun 2026 01:06:27 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
# A Framework for Measuring Appropriate Reliance on Set-Valued AI Advice 

## Ranjan Mishra and Jakob Schoeffer 

## University of Groningen, The Netherlands 

## {r.p.mishra,j.j.schoeffer }@rug.nl 

## ABSTRACT 

Appropriate reliance on AI advice has become a central research theme in human-AI collabora-tion. Existing frameworks have focused exclusively on point predictions as AI advice. However, set-valued AI advice (e.g., discrete sets or continuous intervals) is increasingly being used to com-municate uncertainty and improve human decision making. In this paper, we develop the first for-mal framework for measuring appropriate reliance on set-valued AI advice within the sequential judge-advisor paradigm, spanning both classification and regression tasks. For classification, we first introduce the dimensions that are necessary for evaluating set-valued AI advice. We then define two metrics: correct reliance rate on AI and correct reliance rate on self , which jointly characterize appropriate reliance in this setting. For regression, we introduce quantity of AI reliance and qual-ity of AI reliance , which respectively measure whether a decision maker utilized the AI advice and whether their reliance helped them get closer to the ground truth relative to their initial estimate. Through the application of our framework, we demonstrate how these metrics capture important nuances in human-AI collaboration that existing measures overlook. 

## 1 Introduction 

AI systems are increasingly being integrated into high-stakes decision-making domains such as medicine, law, finance, and public administration [Eckhardt et al., 2025, Raees et al., 2026]. In these settings, a human decision maker receives AI advice and must decide how much weight to give to it. The common goal is that the out-put of this collaborative process surpasses what either the human or the AI could achieve alone, a property known as 

human-AI complementarity [Bansal et al., 2021]. Achiev-ing complementarity requires that the human decision maker relies appropriately on AI advice: following it when it is correct and resisting it when it is not [Schemmer et al., 2023, Lee and See, 2004]. Research has shown two systematic failure modes in ap-propriate reliance. Automation bias leads humans to follow AI advice even when it is incorrect, deferring to the system rather than exercising independent judg-ment [Mosier and Skitka, 2018]. Algorithm aversion leads humans to dismiss AI advice even when it would im-prove their decisions [Dietvorst et al., 2015]. Both fail-ures are well studied but almost exclusively in the con-text of point predictions, where the AI advice is a single label or value [Raees et al., 2026]. Moreover, existing frameworks for measuring appropriate reliance are built on this binary correct-or-incorrect characterization of AI advice [Schemmer et al., 2023, Cabitza et al., 2023]. This design assumption limits the scope of appropriate reliance research and practice to a type of AI advice that is no longer the only or even the dominant form in which AI ad-vice is communicated to humans [Eckhardt et al., 2025]. AI systems increasingly produce advice that expresses uncertainty explicitly [Bhatt et al., 2021]. For classifi-cation tasks, by outputting prediction sets that enumer-ate the range of plausible labels, and for regression tasks, by outputting prediction intervals that bound the range of plausible values. For instance, a clinical decision support system might output a prediction set {pneumonia, bron-chitis, asthma } rather than a single diagnosis, or a tool used for house price estimation might output an interval [$340K, $420K] rather than a point prediction. To under-stand how humans respond to set-valued AI advice, re-searchers have used the sequential judge-advisor system 

(JAS) framework [Bonaccio and Dalal, 2006], in which a human first makes an initial decision and then makes a final decision after receiving the AI advice. There is growing empirical evidence that set-valued AI advice can improve human decision making (e.g., Cress-well et al., 2024, Zhang et al., 2024a, Folgado et al., 2025). However, most of these studies focus on accuracy as a metric, which is insufficient to characterize reliance be-cause it can conflate appropriate reliance with undesirable reliance patterns like automation bias and algorithm aver-1

> arXiv:2606.06081v1 [cs.AI] 4 Jun 2026

PREPRINT 

sion [Raees et al., 2026]. For instance, a decision maker can achieve high accuracy by blindly following every AI advice [Raees et al., 2026, Schoeffer et al., 2025]. This means that accuracy alone is not sufficient as a metric to characterize reliance behavior. Other studies using the JAS framework measure reliance directly, but focus on the quantity (i.e., how much decision makers moved toward the AI advice) rather than quality —whether that adjustment was appropriate and helped them get closer to the ground truth. Taken together, this moti-vates the central research question guiding our study: 

RQ What does appropriate reliance mean when AI ad-vice is a set (rather than a point prediction)? 

To address this question, we develop a framework for measuring appropriate reliance on set-valued AI advice using the JAS framework. For classification tasks, we de-rive an exhaustive taxonomy of behavioral reliance pat-terns and separate them as beneficial, detrimental, or in-effective. We then introduce two new metrics: correct reliance rate on AI (CRR AI ), which measures the propor-tion of instances in which the human decision maker fol-lowed the AI advice and their final decision was correct, and correct reliance rate on self (CRR self ), which mea-sures the proportion of instances in which the AI advice was not followed and the decision maker exercised inde-pendent judgment to reach the correct answer. Together, these metrics characterize appropriate reliance in the clas-sification setting. For regression tasks with interval-valued advice, we build upon the weight of advice (WoA) metric [Bonaccio and Dalal, 2006]—a standard behavioral measure that quanti-fies the extent to which a decision maker adjusts their final estimate toward the AI advice. However, WoA is an insuf-ficient metric for appropriate reliance because it cannot distinguish whether adjusting toward the AI advice was beneficial or not. A decision maker can move substan-tially toward the advice and still end up further from the truth if the advice is poorly calibrated. To address this, we introduce two complementary metrics that disentan-gle behavioral adjustment from decision quality: quantity of AI reliance (AIR quant ), which provides a well-behaved measure of behavioral adjustment relative to the advice, and quality of AI reliance (AIR qual ), which measures the proportional improvement in absolute error attributable to that adjustment. Together, these metrics characterize ap-propriate reliance by separating how much the human fol-lowed the advice from how beneficial that adjustment was to the final outcome. Using stylized decision-making tasks, we illustrate that the proposed metrics provide important insight into human-AI collaboration beyond what existing measures capture. Ultimately, our framework provides researchers and practitioners the diagnostic tools needed to identify specific behavioral pathologies and design systems and interventions that foster appropriate reliance. 

## 2 Background and Related Work 

In this section, we review two areas of research most rel-evant to our work. First, we examine how uncertainty is communicated in AI advice and how it shapes human de-cision making, especially in the context of set-valued ad-vice. Second, we review existing frameworks for measur-ing appropriate reliance on AI advice and identify their limitations when applied to sets. 

2.1 Uncertainty in Human-AI Collaboration 

Communicating uncertainty in AI advice is increasingly recognized as critical for supporting human decision mak-ing [Bhatt et al., 2021, Prabhudesai et al., 2023]. Tradi-tionally, AI advice has taken the form of a single point prediction in the form of a definitive label or value, leav-ing the human to decide whether to accept or reject it. Set-valued advice offers a fundamentally different form of support: it offers a range of possible values rather than a single definite value. Several methods exist for generating such sets. In classi-fication, a common baseline is the top-k approach, which typically selects k labels with the highest softmax prob-abilities. However, more robust methods like confor-mal prediction have gained prominence, primarily be-cause they offer rigorous statistical guarantees [Shafer and Vovk, 2008]. Unlike fixed-size heuristics, conformal methods produce sets that are guaranteed to contain the true outcome with a user-specified probability (e.g., 90% ). The method adapts the set size dynamically based on this probability. This framework supports both classifica-tion [Angelopoulos and Bates, 2023] and regression [Ro-mano et al., 2019] tasks. Empirical evidence on how humans respond to set-valued AI advice is growing but shows a mixed picture. For clas-sification tasks, Cresswell et al. [2024] conduct a random-ized controlled trial comparing conformal prediction sets to fixed-size top-k sets across three tasks, finding that con-formal sets improve human accuracy across image classi-fication, sentiment classification, and named-entity recog-nition tasks, which they attribute to the variable set size communicating model uncertainty. Zhang et al. [2024a] compare conformal prediction sets to top-1 and top-10 predictions for image labeling, finding that prediction sets improve accuracy for hard out-of-distribution instances but reduce accuracy for easy in-distribution instances due to increased cognitive load from larger sets. Folgado et al. [2025] study set-valued versus single-valued support for ECG interpretation among 62 cardiologists, finding that set-valued support significantly improves diagnostic accu-racy in complex cases but has a negative effect for simpler cases. For regression tasks, studies using the JAS framework have examined how human decision makers respond to set-valued AI advice. Leffrang and M¨ uller [2025] study COVID-19 hospitalization forecasting with 95% predic-2PREPRINT 

tion interval plots versus ensemble plots and point fore-casts, finding that prediction interval plots increase confi-dence and advice utilization compared to point forecasts, while ensemble plots decrease advice utilization despite conveying more uncertainty. Moreover, Holstein et al. [2025] conduct two experiments on housing price estima-tion with prediction intervals, finding that interval width consistently reduces how much decision makers move their final estimate toward the advice (WoA), while fram-ing uncertainty as aleatoric versus epistemic has no sig-nificant effect on reliance behavior. Altogether, these studies establish that human decision makers utilize set-valued AI advice differently than point-based ones. However, across these studies, a clear lim-itation is that they mostly focus on accuracy as a met-ric, despite accuracy being insufficient for characterizing reliance behavior [Schoeffer et al., 2025]. As discussed earlier, accuracy conflates appropriate reliance with unde-sirable behaviors such as automation bias and algorithm aversion. Even when prior studies measure reliance di-rectly, they typically focus on the extent to which humans adjust toward the AI advice (e.g., through WoA) rather than on whether that adjustment was appropriate. Our framework addresses this limitation by explicitly condi-tioning reliance measures on the ground truth, which al-lows us to distinguish whether reliance on AI advice was beneficial, detrimental, or ineffective. 

2.2 Metrics of (Appropriate) Reliance 

Existing metrics of AI reliance can be categorized into two groups: those that measure the quantity of the behav-ioral adjustment toward the AI advice, and those that mea-sure the appropriateness (or quality ) of that shift relative to the ground truth. In prior work, the most common metrics for measuring AI reliance focus exclusively on the magnitude of agree-ment or adjustment; that is, the quantity of reliance. For classification, a recent analytical review of 56 empirical studies on human-AI decision making finds that agree-ment fraction (21 studies) and switch fraction (15 studies) are the most commonly reported metrics for measuring AI reliance [Raees et al., 2026]. For regression, WoA serves as the standard behavioral measure for quantifying the hu-man’s adjustment toward AI advice [Bonaccio and Dalal, 2006, Bailey et al., 2023, Kahr et al., 2024]. However, these metrics are “truth-blind.” A high switch fraction or a large WoA indicates that the human followed the AI ad-vice, but it cannot distinguish whether this was beneficial (i.e., improving accuracy) or detrimental (i.e., leading the human into an error). Hence, relying on quantity metrics alone to measure reliance risks misinterpreting blind def-erence with successful collaboration. To resolve this ambiguity, recent frameworks have intro-duced the concept of appropriate reliance. Appropriate reliance requires that human decision makers follow the AI advice when it is correct and resist such advice when it is not [Lee and See, 2004, Schemmer et al., 2023, Schoef-fer et al., 2025]. Schemmer et al. [2023] define the rela-tive AI reliance rate (RAIR) and the relative self-reliance rate (RSR) as operationalization of appropriate reliance for point-prediction AI advice. RAIR measures the pro-portion of instances where a human appropriately follows correct AI advice, conditioned on instances where the hu-man’s prior was wrong and the AI was correct. RSR mea-sures the proportion of instances where a human appropri-ately resists incorrect AI advice, conditioned on instances where the human’s prior was correct and the AI was wrong. Together, RAIR and RSR form a two-dimensional characterization that separates automation bias (low RSR) from algorithm aversion (low RAIR). Cabitza et al. [2023] extend the framework of Schemmer et al. [2023] to an 8-tuple decision table enumerating all combinations of a human’s initial decision, AI advice, and the human’s final decision being correct or not, and measure the degree to which AI advice dominates human judgment. Further, they introduce odds-ratio measures of automation bias and algorithm aversion. These metrics have recently been applied to analyze human-AI perfor-mance and reliance behaviors across various domains to gain insights that accuracy alone cannot give (e.g., He et al., 2023, 2024, Salimzadeh et al., 2024, Holstein et al., 2025). All these frameworks share one common limitation: they assume AI advice is a point prediction (right vs. wrong). This assumption breaks down in the context of set-valued advice, where the relevant questions are whether the set covers the ground truth, whether the human enters the set, and whether doing so improved their final decision. No existing frameworks condition on these jointly. Our work addresses this gap through the first framework for appro-priate reliance on set-valued AI advice. The framework introduces novel metrics that capture both the quantity and quality of reliance in classification and regression settings and enables analyses of human-AI collaboration that ex-isting reliance metrics cannot support. 

## 3 Theoretical Framework 

Our framework focuses on set-valued AI advice: dis-crete prediction sets for classification tasks and continu-ous prediction intervals for regression tasks. We adopt the 

sequential judge-advisor paradigm [Bonaccio and Dalal, 2006], in which a human decision maker first forms an independent judgment before observing AI advice, and then submits a final decision. The sequential paradigm is essential for measuring reliance: without a pre-advice decision, it is impossible to distinguish whether the hu-man followed the advice or arrived at the same answer independently [Raees et al., 2026]. We follow established notation in the literature. As in-troduced by Mikhaylova et al. [2026]. Given a decision space Y, let: 3PREPRINT 

• H ∈ Y denote the human’s initial decision 

(sometimes also referred to as prior belief ); • F ∈ Y denote the human’s final decision ,recorded after seeing the AI advice; • y ∈ Y denote the ground truth ;• A ⊆ Y denote the set-valued AI advice. In the (multi-class) classification setting, Y =

{1, . . . , K }, K ∈ N, is a finite label space and A is a discrete prediction set. In the regression setting, Y ⊂ R

and A = [ L, U ] is a continuous prediction interval with L

and U being the lower and upper bounds of that interval, respectively. For regression, we additionally define 

M = ( L + U )/2 as the midpoint of [L, U ], which serves as the AI’s implicit point estimate of the most likely outcome. 

3.1 Classification 

Unlike prior reliance frameworks (e.g., Schemmer et al., 2023, Cabitza et al., 2023) that condition only on the cor-rectness of the AI’s point prediction , our framework con-ditions jointly on whether H, F , and y lie within the set 

A. We consider the following five binary dimensions to get an exhaustive taxonomy of all possible reliance be-haviors. 1. 1[H ∈ A]: whether the initial decision lies in-side the prediction set; 2. 1[H = y]: whether the initial decision is correct; 3. 1[y ∈ A]: whether the prediction set covers the ground truth; 4. 1[F ∈ A]: whether the final decision lies inside the prediction set; 5. 1[F = y]: whether the final decision is correct. These five binary dimensions yield 25 = 32 total combi-nations. However, 14 are logically impossible given the following constraints: • (H / ∈ A) ∧ (H = y) ∧ (y ∈ A) is impossible: if 

(H = y) ∧ (y ∈ A) → H ∈ A;• (H ∈ A) ∧ (H = y) ∧ (y / ∈ A) is impossible: if 

(H = y) ∧ (y / ∈ A) → H / ∈ A;• (F ∈ A) ∧ (F = y) ∧ (y / ∈ A) is impossible: if 

(F = y) ∧ (y / ∈ A) → F / ∈ A;• (F / ∈ A) ∧ (F = y) ∧ (y ∈ A) is impossible: if 

(F = y) ∧ (y ∈ A) → F ∈ A.This yields 18 valid combinations, which we partition into different (instance-level) reliance behaviors. Those are summarized in Table 1 and illustrated in Figure 1, to-gether with a descriptive taxonomy of reliance behaviors that is as follows: we call a reliance behavior beneficial if 

F = y (i.e., the human’s final decision is correct). We call it detrimental if H = y and F̸ = y, and we call it ineffec-tive if H̸ = y and F̸ = y. We further denote AI reliance 

cases where F ∈ A, and self-reliance cases where F / ∈ A

(i.e., self-reliance is when the human’s final decision is outside the AI advice).                                                                                                            

> Initial decision AI advice Final decision Reliance behavior
> H∈AH=yy∈AF∈AF=y
> 00000Ineffective self-reliance 00001Beneficial self-reliance 00010Ineffective AI reliance 00100Ineffective self-reliance 00110Ineffective AI reliance 00111Beneficial AI reliance 01000Detrimental self-reliance 01001Beneficial self-reliance 01010Detrimental AI reliance 10000Ineffective self-reliance 10001Beneficial self-reliance 10010Ineffective AI reliance 10100Ineffective self-reliance 10110Ineffective AI reliance 10111Beneficial AI reliance 11100Detrimental self-reliance 11110Detrimental AI reliance 11111Beneficial AI reliance

Table 1: The 18 logically valid combinations of the five binary dimensions for classification, each annotated with its interpretable reliance behavior. A value of 1 means the condition holds and 0 means it does not (e.g., H ∈ A = 1 

means the initial decision lies inside the prediction set). Each row is a reliance pattern at the instance level. Abehavior is beneficial if F = y, detrimental if H = y

and F̸ = y, and ineffective if H̸ = y and F̸ = y. Cases with F ∈ A are AI reliance; cases with F /∈ A are self-reliance. Next, we introduce two aggregate metrics that together constitute the appropriateness of reliance for classifica-tion (AoR-C), building on the conceptual structure from Schemmer et al. [2023]. 

3.1.1 Correct Reliance Rate on AI (CRR AI )

We define CRR AI over all instances where the AI advice was informative ( y ∈ A). 1 Among these instances, we measure the proportion of cases where the human decision maker’s followed the AI advice and their final decision was correct ( F = y), regardless of their initial decision 

H.Mathematically: CRR AI = Ny∈A, F =y

Ny∈A

∈ [0 , 1] , N y∈A̸ = 0 ,

> 1

CRR AI is not defined when AI advice is never informative. Those cases have no practical relevance when considering a suf-ficiently large number of instances. 

4PREPRINT Initial decision          

> (H)
> AI advice
> (A)
> Option A
> Option B
> Option C
> ...
> Final decision
> (F) Ground
> truth
> (y)
> Reliance behavior
> Beneficial self /AI reliance
> Detrimental self /AI reliance
> Ineffective self /AI r eliance

Figure 1: The sequential judge-advisor setup for set-valued AI advice in classification. A human decision maker first makes an initial decision H, then observes the AI advice A (a prediction set), and submits a final decision F .Comparing H, A, and F against the ground truth y yields the reliance behavior, which we classify as beneficial, ineffective, or detrimental and as self- or AI reliance (see Table 1). with Ny∈A, F =y denoting the number of instances classi-fied as beneficial AI reliance in Table 1. Similarly, Ny∈A

indicates the number of instances where the AI advice was informative; that is, all cases where y ∈ A in Table 1. A value of CRR AI = 1 indicates that whenever the AI advice was informative, the human decision maker fol-lowed it, and their final decision was always correct. A value of CRR AI = 0 indicates that the human decision maker’s final decision was never correct on any of the in-stances where the AI advice was informative, regardless of whether they followed the advice or not. 

3.1.2 Correct Reliance Rate on Self (CRR self )

CRR self is defined over all instances where the AI advice was uninformative ( y / ∈ A). 2 Among these instances, we measure the proportion where the human did not follow the AI advice, and their final decision was still correct (F = y). Mathematically: CRR self = Ny / ∈A, F =y

Ny / ∈A

∈ [0 , 1] , N y / ∈A̸ = 0 ,

following the same notation as previously. A value of CRR self = 1 indicates that whenever the AI advice was uninformative, the human always made the correct final decision using their own judgment, while a value of CRR self = 0 indicates that the human never made the correct final decision when the AI advice was uninfor-mative. 

3.1.3 Appropriateness of Reliance for Classification (AoR-C) 

We characterize the appropriateness of reliance jointly through the two metrics defined above: 

> 2

CRR self is not defined when AI advice is always informa-tive. Given a sufficiently large number of instances, this would, in practice, mean that AI advice trivially includes (almost) all possible outcomes. 

AoR-C = ( CRR AI , CRR self ).

CRR AI captures how well the human performs when the AI advice is informative, while CRR self captures how well the human uses their own judgment when the AI ad-vice is not informative. Together, they provide a two-dimensional characterization of reliance behavior that nei-ther metric offers alone. The ideal point is (1 , 1) , indi-cating that the human always benefits from the AI advice when it is informative and always relies on their own judg-ment correctly when it is not. When either metric is low, the taxonomy in Table 1 allows the failure mode to be diagnosed more precisely. A low CRR self score implies that in the instances where the AI advice was uninformative ( y /∈ A), the human decision maker reached an incorrect final decision ( F̸ = y): 

1 − CRR self = Ny / ∈A,F ̸ =y

Ny / ∈A

.

The numerator in this equation breaks down into two dis-tinct cases: Ny / ∈A,F ̸ =y,F ∈A and Ny / ∈A,F ̸ =y,F / ∈A. If the majority of instances fall into the former, the dominant failure mode is automation bias , because the human er-roneously relied on uninformative AI advice. The latter represents a form of miscalibration where the human cor-rectly resisted the poor AI advice but was unable to reach the ground truth through independent judgment. Similarly, a low CRR AI score implies that in the majority of instances where the AI advice was informative ( y ∈ A), the human failed to reach a correct final decision: 

1 − CRR AI = Ny∈A,F ̸ =y

Ny∈A

.

Two distinct failure modes underlie this metric: 

Ny∈A,F ̸ =y,F / ∈A and Ny∈A,F ̸ =y,F ∈A. The former is a case of algorithm aversion , where the human did not engage with informative AI advice. The latter indicates another form of miscalibration , where the human utilized 5PREPRINT 

the AI advice but was unable to identify the correct an-swer within it—potentially due to the set being too large. By disentangling these failure modes, our framework provides a taxonomy that functions as a diagnostic tool to design systems and interventions for appropriate reliance. 

3.1.4 Relationship to Existing Metrics 

CRR AI and CRR self can also be interpreted as a decom-position of decision-making accuracy. Weighting each by the proportion of informative and uninformative in-stances, respectively, recovers accuracy: 

CRR AI · P (y ∈ A) + CRR self · P (y / ∈ A)= Ny∈A, F =y

Ny∈A

· Ny∈A

N + Ny / ∈A, F =y

Ny / ∈A

· Ny / ∈A

N

= Ny∈A, F =y + Ny / ∈A, F =y

N = NF =y

N , (1) where N without subscript denotes the total number of instances. Our framework partitions accuracy into two interpretable components and distinguishes reliance pat-terns that overall accuracy cannot capture. For instance, high overall accuracy may stem either from automation bias or from algorithm aversion [Schoeffer et al., 2025]; we will exemplify this in Section 4. Compared to the RAIR and RSR metrics of Schemmer et al. [2023], which condition on the correctness of a point prediction, our metrics condition on y ∈ A and y / ∈ A, the natural analog for set-valued AI advice. Unlike agreement and switch fractions [Raees et al., 2026], which only mea-sure behavioral compliance, our metrics require F = y to ensure that the reliance quality is always conditioned on correctness. 

3.2 Regression 

For regression tasks, AI advice takes the form of a contin-uous prediction interval A = [ L, U ] with midpoint M .Analogous to the classification setting, we characterize appropriate reliance along two dimensions: whether the human decision maker utilized the AI advice, and whether doing so improved their final decision ( F ) relative to their initial decision ( H). 

3.2.1 Quantity of AI Reliance (AIR quant )

We characterize the utilization of AI advice through a new metric called quantity of AI reliance (AIR quant ), which measures the proportional reduction (or increase) in dis-tance to the interval midpoint M :AIR quant =



0 if H = F = M, 

−∞ if H = M and F̸ = M,      

> |H−M|−| F−M||H−M|

otherwise, with AIR quant ∈ (−∞ , 1] , where positive values indicate movement toward M , and negative values indicate move-ment away from it; a value of AIR quant = 1 indicates 

F = M with H̸ = M ; that is, a non-zero movement to the interval midpoint. Moreover, a value of AIR quant = 0 

denotes that the human decision maker’s initial and final decision is exactly the interval midpoint (H = F = M )

or that the human’s initial and final decision are both the same (H = F ). Finally, AIR quant = −∞ when the hu-man decision maker’s initial decision is exactly the inter-val midpoint ( H = M ) but their final decision is different from the initial decision ( F̸ = M ). Mathematically, this means an infinite relative decrease in distance to the mid-point. The two special cases handle division by zero and are included for completeness; in practice, exact equality of H or F with M occurs with zero probability given suf-ficient numerical precision. The metric AIR quant measures only the quantity of reliance, not its quality : a decision maker can move substantially toward (or away from) M

and still end up further from the ground truth y.

3.2.2 Quality of AI Reliance (AIR qual )

We measure whether relying on the AI advice improved the human decision maker’s final decision (F ) compared to their initial decision (H) by introducing a metric called AIR qual , which measures the proportional improvement in absolute error that can be attributed to AI reliance. Mathematically: AIR qual =



0 if H = F = y, 

−∞ if H = y and F̸ = y,   

> |H−y|−| F−y||H−y|

otherwise, with AIR qual ∈ (−∞ , 1] , where 1 indicates a perfectly correct final decision F = y, 0 indicates no change from an already correct initial decision (H = F = y) and −∞ 

indicates the human moved away from a perfectly correct initial decision H = y, F ̸ = y. The same considerations regarding the special cases and their near-zero probability in practice apply as for AIR quant .

3.2.3 Appropriateness of Reliance for Regression (AoR-R) 

We characterize the appropriateness of reliance jointly through the two metrics defined above: AoR-R = ( AIR quant , AIR qual ).

AIR quant captures the degree to which the human moved toward (or away from) the AI advice, while AIR qual cap-tures whether that movement was beneficial. Together, they provide a two-dimensional characterization of re-liance behavior that neither metric offers alone. Figure 2 distinguishes the distinct reliance behaviors as-sociated with different range of values for AIR quant and AIR qual . Positive values for both metrics indicate that the decision maker moved toward the AI midpoint M

and improved their final decision accuracy. This consti-tutes appropriate reliance on AI . When AIR quant is neg-ative but AIR qual is positive, the decision maker moved 6PREPRINT 

away from the AI midpoint and used their independent judgment to improve their final decision indicating ap-propriate reliance on self . The framework also charac-terizes two failure modes: the automation bias quadrant captures instances where the human adjusted their esti-mate toward the AI midpoint (positive AIR quant ), but this adjustment increased their final error (negative AIR qual ). Negative values for both metrics indicate algorithm aver-sion meaning that the decision maker moved away from the AI midpoint and, in doing so, worsened their final de-cision. This suggests the AI estimate was actually more accurate than the human’s initial decision, but the human rejected the advice to their own detriment. We exemplify these distinct behaviors through examples in Section 4. AIR quant 

AIR qual  

> 01
> 1
> −∞
> −∞
> Appropriate reliance on self
> Appropriate reliance on AI
> Algorithm aversion
> Automation bias

Figure 2: The AoR-R space for regression, defined by the quantity (AIR quant ) and quality (AIR qual ) of AI reliance. The sign of each metric partitions reliance behavior into four regions: appropriate reliance on AI, appropriate re-liance on self, automation bias, and algorithm aversion. Both metrics take values in (−∞ , 1] .

3.2.4 Relationship to Existing Metrics 

AIR quant is closely related to the weight of advice (WoA) metric [Bonaccio and Dalal, 2006], a standard measure of advice utilization in the judge-advisor literature. WoA measures the signed proportion of the distance between 

H and M that the human traversed in their final decision 

F ; that is, (F − H)/(M − H). However, WoA does not account for overshooting , which can lead to misleading values. Consider an example where H = 12 , M = 10 ,and F = 4 . Here, a positive WoA value of +4 indicates high reliance but it does not accurately reflect that the hu-man overshot the AI midpoint and landed much farther away from it compared to their initial decision. Moreover, WoA is not defined for cases where H = M .AIR quant introduces important refinements to WoA, namely (a) normalization by absolute distance, and (b)

coverage of edge cases, in order to ensure that the metric remains well-behaved and interpretable regardless of the error direction or magnitude. AIR qual , on the other hand, is related to the instance-level absolute error change ∆AE := |H −y|−| F −y|, which is the numerator of AIR qual . Specifically, AIR qual is the pro-portional reduction in absolute error—a normalized ver-sion of ∆AE that adjusts for the initial error |H − y|.

## 4 Application 

We illustrate the usefulness of our framework through stylized decision making scenarios for classification and regression—constructed to demonstrate important analy-ses that are not possible with existing metrics. 

4.1 Case Study: Classification 

Consider an occupation prediction task in which an AI system provides conformal prediction sets over 28 occu-pations [De-Arteaga et al., 2019] as advice. A human re-cruiter records an initial assessment H, reviews the pre-diction set A, and submits a final decision F .Suppose the recruiter achieves an overall final decision-making accuracy of 60% using an AI system with cover-age P (y ∈ A) = 0 .70 as advice. On the surface, a 60% accuracy in a 28-class task appears satisfactory. However, without decomposition, we cannot distinguish the under-lying reliance behaviors propping up this score. From the decomposition of Equation (1) in Section 3.1, we obtain: 

0.60 = 0 .70 · CRR AI + 0 .30 · CRR self ,

and solving for CRR self gives: CRR self = 0.60 − 0.70 · CRR AI 

0.30 = 2 − 73 CRR AI .

The feasible segment within [0 , 1] 2 is found by evaluat-ing the boundary conditions. Setting CRR self = 1 gives CRR AI = 3 /7 ≈ 0.43 , and setting CRR self = 0 gives CRR AI = 6 /7 ≈ 0.86 ; the intersections at CRR AI ∈{0, 1} fall outside [0 , 1] 2 and are infeasible. The feasi-ble segment, therefore, connects (3 /7, 1) and (6 /7, 0) ,as shown in Figure 3. Knowing the accuracy and coverage alone does not iden-tify where on this segment the recruiter lies—any AoR-C pair on the segment is consistent with the given ac-curacy of 60% and P (y ∈ A) = 0 .70 .3 Let us con-sider two possible points on the isoline, A and B, where the recruiter could be. If they are at point A where 

(CRR AI , CRR self ) = (0 .50 , 0.83) , the primary issue is the low CRR AI score of 0.50 , which signals a potential failure mode, and our framework allows us to diagnose this further. If the majority of the mistaken decisions with       

> 3For illustration, we are assuming here that the recruiter makes an infinite amount of decisions (i.e., N→∞).In practice, however, Nis finite, so the isoline consists of discrete points rather than a continuous line.

7PREPRINT 

CRR AI 

CRR self     

> 01
> 1
> (1 ,1) (0 .43 ,1.00)
> (0 .86 ,0.00)

A = (0 .50 , 0.83) 

B = (0 .75 , 0.25) 

Figure 3: Accuracy isoline in the AoR-C space for a final decision-making accuracy of 60% and AI coverage P (y ∈

A) = 0 .70 . Every (CRR AI , CRR self ) pair on the segment connecting (0 .43 , 1.00) and (0 .86 , 0.00) is consistent with this accuracy and coverage. Points A = (0 .50 , 0.83) and 

B = (0 .75 , 0.25) lie on the same isoline but reflect op-posing reliance behaviors, which accuracy alone cannot distinguish. 

y ∈ A are such that F / ∈ A (i.e., the recruiter ignored the informative advice), then the recruiter is exhibiting algo-rithm aversion . Otherwise, if the majority of the mistaken decisions with y ∈ A are such that F ∈ A, this means the recruiter is engaging with the AI advice but failing to arrive at the correct answer, suggesting a form of miscali-bration. On the other hand, if the recruiter is at point B at 

(0 .75 , 0.25) , the main concern here is the low CRR self 

score of 0.25 . In this case, if the majority of the wrong decisions with y / ∈ A are such that F ∈ A, then the failure mode is automation bias , as the human is relying on un-informative AI advice. Otherwise, if mostly F / ∈ A, then the failure mode might again be a form of miscalibration, where the recruiter correctly resisted the uninformative AI advice but was unable to reach the ground truth through independent judgment. Both points A and B satisfy the isoline equation exactly (0.70 ·0.50+0 .30 ·0.83 = 0 .70 ·0.75+0 .30 ·0.25 = 0 .60 ), yet they represent opposing reliance behaviors. Behavior in A potentially calls for interventions that help build trust in the AI system; B may, for instance, call for training recruiters to critically engage with AI advice. AoR-C is the only framework that reveals this distinction and helps design for appropriate reliance. 

4.2 Case Study: Regression 

Consider a house price estimation task in which an AI system provides prediction intervals. A human appraiser Case: Algorithm aversion        

> 610
> 600 500 700 800 900
> 800 810
> House price estimate ($, thousands)
> AI advice Ground truth Initial decision Final decision

Figure 4: Case of algorithm aversion . The appraiser’s initial estimate ($800K) is far from the ground truth ($610K). Despite well-calibrated AI advice centered at $600K, the appraiser moves their final estimate to $810K, away from both the advice and the ground truth, yielding AIR quant = −0.05 and AIR qual = −0.05 .first records an initial estimate H, then sees the interval 

[L, U ] with midpoint M , and eventually submits a final estimate F . We construct four individual decision-making scenarios depicting different reliance behaviors, shown in Table 2, to illustrate the merits of our framework. AIR quant AIR qual 

Case: Algorithm aversion −0.05 −0.05 

Case: Automation bias 0.91 −14 .00 

Case: Appropriate reliance on AI 0.95 0.97 

Case: Appropriate reliance on self −0.11 0.67 

Table 2: Quantity (AIR quant ) and quality (AIR qual ) of AI reliance for the four stylized house price estimation cases (Figures 4–7). The cases show that behavioral reliance and decision quality can diverge; for instance, both au-tomation bias and appropriate reliance on AI have high AIR quant , but only the latter has positive AIR qual .

4.2.1 Case: Algorithm aversion 

As visualized in Figure 4, the appraiser begins with an inaccurate estimate of $800K while the ground truth is $610K. Despite receiving well-calibrated AI advice cen-tered at $600K, the appraiser moves their final estimate further away from the advice and their initial estimate to $810K. This under-utilization of helpful advice results in a negative quantity of reliance (AIR quant = −0.05 ) and a negative quality of reliance (AIR qual = −0.05 ), as can be seen in Table 2. This indicates that the appraiser’s inde-pendent judgment actively increased the decision error. 

4.2.2 Case: Automation bias 

Figure 5 shows an appraiser with a highly accurate ini-tial estimate of $400K relative to the $420K ground truth. The AI provides a poorly calibrated interval centered at $750K. The appraiser defers strongly to this advice, mov-ing the final estimate to $720K. As shown in Table 2, 8PREPRINT Case: Automation bias        

> 420
> 500 400 600 700 800
> 400 720
> House price estimate ($, thousands)
> AI advice Ground truth Initial decision Final decision

Figure 5: Case of automation bias . The appraiser starts with a good initial estimate ($400K) close to the ground truth ($420K) but defers to a poorly calibrated AI interval centered at $750K, moving the final estimate to $720K. The high AIR quant = 0 .91 reflects strong behavioral re-liance, while AIR qual = −14 .00 shows the adjustment was harmful. Case: Appropriate reliance on AI        

> 790
> 500 400 600 700 800
> 400 780
> House price estimate ($, thousands)
> AI advice Ground truth Initial decision Final decision
> 900

Figure 6: Case of appropriate reliance on AI . The ap-praiser’s initial estimate ($400K) is far from the ground truth ($790K). They adjust their final estimate to $780K, close to the ground truth, yielding high positive scores for both quantity (AIR quant = 0 .95 ) and quality (AIR qual =0.97 ) of reliance. while AIR quant = 0 .91 shows significant behavioral re-liance, the catastrophic quality score of AIR qual = −14 .00 

reveals that this reliance was deeply harmful, increasing the absolute error by 1400%. 

4.2.3 Case: Appropriate reliance on AI 

As shown in Figure 6, the appraiser is initially far from the ground truth ($400K vs. $790K). By recognizing the value of the AI advice, they adjust their final decision to $780K, very close to the ground truth. This adjustment is reflected by high positive scores for both the quantity of reliance (AIR quant = 0 .95 ) and the resulting quality (AIR qual = 0 .97 ). 

4.2.4 Case: Appropriate reliance on self 

Finally, Figure 7 shows the appraiser correctly over-ruling a poor AI system. The appraiser’s initial estimate of $880K is near the ground truth of $910K, while the AI suggests a much lower interval [$600K, $800K] with mid-Case: Appropriate reliance on self       

> 910
> 600 700 800
> 880 900
> House price estimate ($, thousands)
> AI advice Ground truth Initial decision Final decision
> 900

Figure 7: Case of appropriate reliance on self . The ap-praiser’s initial estimate ($880K) is near the ground truth ($910K), while the AI suggests a lower interval [$600K, $800K] with midpoint $700K. The appraiser sets a final estimate of $900K, moving away from the AI. The nega-tive AIR quant = −0.11 signals rejection of the advice, and the positive AIR qual = 0 .67 confirms this self-reliance re-duced the error. point $700K. The appraiser chooses a final estimate of $900K, effectively moving away from the AI. The nega-tive quantity of reliance (AIR quant = −0.11 ) signals the rejection of advice, while the positive quality (AIR qual =0.67 ) identifies this as appropriate self-reliance that suc-cessfully reduced the initial error. These four cases demonstrate that WoA alone cannot dis-tinguish beneficial from harmful reliance—cases automa-tion bias and appropriate reliance on AI would both ap-pear as high reliance under WoA, yet one is detrimen-tal and the other appropriate. Only by jointly reporting AIR quant and AIR qual can one identify which failure mode is present and design the right intervention. 

## 5 Discussion 

Our framework provides the first formal basis for measur-ing appropriate reliance on set-valued AI advice. As AI systems increasingly communicate uncertainty through prediction sets and intervals rather than point predictions alone [Eckhardt et al., 2025], existing reliance frame-works based on binary notions of correct versus incorrect advice become insufficient for characterizing human-AI collaboration. Beyond the metrics themselves, our frame-work has broader implications for how human-AI collab-oration systems are evaluated and designed. 

5.1 Implications for Evaluating Interventions 

A central motivation for measuring appropriate reliance is to support interventions—such as training programs, interface modifications, or explanation strategies—aimed at improving human-AI collaboration. Prior work has largely evaluated such interventions using downstream decision accuracy or variants of the weight of advice 

(WoA) metric [Bonaccio and Dalal, 2006], which are both incomplete characterizations of reliance behavior: accu-9PREPRINT 

racy conflates beneficial reliance with undesirable behav-iors such as automation bias and algorithm aversion, and WoA is lacking a component of decision quality. Our framework makes the distinction between reliance 

quantity and quality actionable. For instance, the isoline analysis in Section 4.1 shows that for a fixed level of accu-racy and AI coverage, the AoR-C tuple uniquely locates the system in the reliance space, revealing whether any dominant failure mode is automation bias or algorithm aversion. This distinction matters because the appropriate intervention for automation bias—reducing blind defer-ence to AI systems—is the opposite of the intervention re-quired for algorithm aversion, which should aim at build-ing calibrated trust in informative advice [Dietvorst et al., 2015, Lee and See, 2004]. Evaluating interventions using accuracy or WoA alone risks obscuring these differences and may even encourage interventions that improve per-formance while worsening reliance behavior. More broadly, our results suggest that evaluations of uncertainty-aware AI systems should move beyond ag-gregate task performance toward behavioral metrics that explicitly characterize reliance patterns and the quality of human oversight. This is particularly important in high-stakes domains, where inappropriate reliance on AI sys-tems can lead to substantial downstream harms [Schoef-fer et al., 2024]. Recent regulatory frameworks, including the EU AI Act, explicitly require meaningful human over-sight for high-risk AI systems to mitigate harms arising from uncritical “rubber-stamping” of AI outputs [Laux and Ruschemeier, 2025, Sterz et al., 2024]. In such set-tings, high accuracy alone is insufficient if human deci-sion makers systematically defer to flawed or biased ad-vice. Our framework also highlights that reliance metrics should be interpreted relative to the performance of the AI system itself. For AI systems with very high cov-erage (i.e., y ∈ A) rates, such as conformal predictors that come with strong coverage guarantees [Angelopoulos and Bates, 2023], cases in which humans should override the AI advice become inherently rare. In such settings, CRR self naturally has a small denominator, which reflects that appropriate behavior will often consist of relying on the AI advice. At the same time, these rare cases where the correct decision lies outside the prediction set become especially important to evaluate. If humans systematically fail to override the AI in such situations, this may indicate a subtle but consequential form of over-reliance despite otherwise strong aggregate performance. 

5.2 Implications for System Design 

Our framework also has implications that go beyond ret-rospective evaluation and inform a proactive design of AI-based decision support systems. A recurring finding from our application scenarios is that when systems are opti-mized for accuracy alone, they may inadvertently encour-age passive deference rather than genuine engagement with AI advice [Mosier and Skitka, 2018]. Over time, such patterns risk eroding human critical thinking abilities and contextual knowledge [Gerlich, 2025]. To mitigate this, systems, including those that issue set-valued advice, should be designed for verifiability —the degree to which a human can independently evaluate the correctness of an AI’s output—rather than predictive power alone [Fok and Weld, 2024]. Our framework provides diagnostic signals needed to identify which specific failure mode a system is exhibit-ing so that we can design appropriate interventions to address these. Most existing interventions, especially explainable AI (XAI), are designed for spotting indi-vidual point mistakes of AI [Buc ¸inca et al., 2021, Vas-concelos et al., 2023, Zhang et al., 2024b]. With set-valued advice, the challenge is fundamentally different: because sets are designed to cover the truth most of the time, they almost always contain a mixture of cor-rect and incorrect candidates. Novel interface designs may be needed—for instance, visual cues that commu-nicate the precision-coverage tradeoff or a flag when a set is likely uninformative—to help users differentiate high-signal from low-signal advice [Langer et al., 2024] and calibrate reliance on sets. In regression settings, the AoR-R quadrants reveal whether users are struggling with algorithm aversion or automation bias. For algorithm aversion, interventions that build (calibrated) trust, for instance, by showing the model’s historical calibration may help. For automation bias, skepticism-inducing interventions—such as requir-ing users to justify a final estimate that deviates substan-tially from their prior before accepting the AI advice— akin to cognitive forcing [Buc ¸inca et al., 2021] might help maintain meaningful human oversight rather than passive rubber-stamping [Green, 2022]. 

5.3 Limitations 

While our framework provides a diagnostic tool for set-valued advice, it is not without limitations. A primary challenge lies in cases where both the human’s initial and final decisions fall within the AI advice set ( H ∈ A and 

F ∈ A). In these instances, it is inherently difficult to disentangle whether a correct final decision was driven by the AI advice or the human’s own expertise. Prior work in point-prediction reliance often sidesteps this ambiguity by conditioning exclusively on instances where the hu-man and AI disagree (e.g., Schemmer et al., 2023) and excluding consensus cases. We include these instances in our metrics to avoid discarding a potentially large propor-tion of the data, particularly when AI coverage is high— otherwise, CRR AI and CRR self would be computed over an unrepresentative subset of interactions. Future work could incorporate latent variable modeling to better infer the specific weight of AI influence in such consensus sce-narios [Tejeda et al., 2022]. 10 PREPRINT 

Regarding the regression metric, AIR quant , like WoA, as-sumes that any movement toward the interval midpoint 

M constitutes an increase in reliance. However, this in-terpretation remains oblivious of the actual boundaries of the set: a decision maker could move significantly toward 

M while remaining outside the interval [L, U ]. While our framework treats M as the primary signal to maintain continuity with standard behavioral measures like WoA, a more conservative approach might incorporate a binary flag to distinguish when the human decision maker en-tered the set versus not. Finally, like all studies utilizing the sequential judge-advisor paradigm [Bonaccio and Dalal, 2006], our met-rics are susceptible to the behavioral artifacts of the ex-perimental setup. The requirement of an initial decision (H) can introduce anchoring effects, where the human’s final decision is tied to their first estimate rather than be-ing a pure reflection of AI reliance. At the same time, without collecting H, it would not be possible to mean-ingfully assess how AI advice influences human reliance or changes subsequent decisions [Schemmer et al., 2023]. This tradeoff is important to keep in mind when using our framework. 

## 6 Conclusion 

Because AI systems increasingly communicate uncer-tainty through set-valued advice rather than single-point predictions, evaluating whether humans rely on such ad-vice appropriately becomes a central challenge for effec-tive human-AI collaboration. This work introduces the first formal framework for measuring appropriate reliance on set-valued AI advice across both classification and re-gression tasks. For classification, our proposed metrics, CRR AI and CRR self , provide an interpretable decompo-sition of decision-making accuracy that captures distinct patterns of human reliance and reveals insights that ex-isting metrics cannot detect. For regression, AIR quant 

and AIR qual jointly measure both the quantity and qual-ity of reliance on AI prediction intervals, which addresses a key limitation that prior work has acknowledged but left unresolved. Together, these metrics provide a prin-cipled foundation for understanding reliance behavior in uncertainty-aware AI systems and offer practical tools for evaluating and designing interventions that promote effec-tive human-AI collaboration. 

## References 

Anastasios N Angelopoulos and Stephen Bates. Confor-mal prediction: A gentle introduction. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning , 16(4):494–591, 2023. Phoebe E Bailey, Tarren Leon, Natalie C Ebner, Ahmed A Moustafa, and Gabrielle Weidemann. A meta-analysis of the weight of advice in decision-making. Current Psychology , 42(28):24516–24541, 2023. Gagan Bansal, Tongshuang Wu, Joyce Zhou, Raymond Fok, Besmira Nushi, Ece Kamar, Marco Tulio Ribeiro, and Daniel Weld. Does the whole exceed its parts? The effect of AI explanations on complementary team per-formance. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 1–16, 2021. Umang Bhatt, Javier Antor´ an, Yunfeng Zhang, Q Vera Liao, Prasanna Sattigeri, Riccardo Fogliato, Gabrielle Melanc ¸on, Ranganath Krishnan, Jason Stanley, Omesh Tickoo, et al. Uncertainty as a form of transparency: Measuring, communicating, and using uncertainty. In 

Proceedings of the 2021 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society , pages 401–413, 2021. Silvia Bonaccio and Reeshad S Dalal. Advice taking and decision-making: An integrative literature review, and implications for the organizational sciences. Organi-zational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 101 (2):127–151, 2006. Zana Buc ¸inca, Maja Barbara Malaya, and Krzysztof Z Gajos. To trust or to think: Cognitive forcing functions can reduce overreliance on AI in AI-assisted decision-making. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction , 5(CSCW1):1–21, 2021. Federico Cabitza, Andrea Campagner, Riccardo Angius, Chiara Natali, and Carlo Reverberi. AI shall have no dominion: On how to measure technology dominance in AI-supported human decision-making. In Proceed-ings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 1–20, 2023. Jesse C Cresswell, Yi Sui, Bhargava Kumar, and No¨ el Vouitsis. Conformal prediction sets improve human de-cision making. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 9439–9457, 2024. Maria De-Arteaga, Alexey Romanov, Hanna Wallach, Jennifer Chayes, Christian Borgs, Alexandra Choulde-chova, Sahin Geyik, Krishnaram Kenthapadi, and Adam Tauman Kalai. Bias in bios: A case study of semantic representation bias in a high-stakes setting. In 

Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Account-ability, and Transparency , pages 120–128, 2019. Berkeley J Dietvorst, Joseph P Simmons, and Cade Massey. Algorithm aversion: People erroneously avoid algorithms after seeing them err. Journal of Experimen-tal Psychology: General , 144(1):114, 2015. Sven Eckhardt, Niklas K¨ uhl, Mateusz Dolata, and Ger-hard Schwabe. A survey of AI reliance. ACM Comput-ing Surveys , 58(6):1–37, 2025. Raymond Fok and Daniel S Weld. In search of verifiabil-ity: Explanations rarely enable complementary perfor-mance in AI-advised decision making. AI Magazine ,45(3):317–332, 2024. Duarte Folgado, Lorenzo Famiglini, Andrea Campagner, H´ elder Dores, Mar´ ılia Barandas, Hugo Gamboa, and 11 PREPRINT 

Federico Cabitza. Conformal prediction for ECG in-terpretation: A study on human-AI collaboration in clinical decision support. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Medicine , pages 140–149. Springer, 2025. Michael Gerlich. AI tools in society: Impacts on cognitive offloading and the future of critical thinking. Societies ,15(1):6, 2025. Ben Green. The flaws of policies requiring human over-sight of government algorithms. Computer Law & Se-curity Review , 45:105681, 2022. Gaole He, Lucie Kuiper, and Ujwal Gadiraju. Knowing about knowing: An illusion of human competence can hinder appropriate reliance on AI systems. In Proceed-ings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 1–18, 2023. Gaole He, Abri Bharos, and Ujwal Gadiraju. To err is AI! Debugging as an intervention to facilitate appro-priate reliance on AI systems. In Proceedings of the 35th ACM Conference on Hypertext and Social Media ,pages 98–105, 2024. Joshua Holstein, Lars B¨ ocking, Philipp Spitzer, Niklas K¨ uhl, Michael V¨ ossing, and Gerhard Satzger. Balanc-ing the unknown: Exploring human reliance on AI ad-vice under aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction , 32(6): 1–34, 2025. Patricia K Kahr, Gerrit Rooks, Martijn C Willemsen, and Chris CP Snijders. Understanding trust and reliance development in AI advice: Assessing model accuracy, model explanations, and experiences from previous in-teractions. ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems , 14(4):1–30, 2024. Markus Langer, Kevin Baum, and Nadine Schlicker. Ef-fective human oversight of AI-based systems: A signal detection perspective on the detection of inaccurate and unfair outputs. Minds and Machines , 35(1):1, 2024. Johann Laux and Hannah Ruschemeier. Automation bias in the AI Act: On the legal implications of attempting to de-bias human oversight of AI. European Journal of Risk Regulation , pages 1–16, 2025. John D Lee and Katrina A See. Trust in automation: De-signing for appropriate reliance. Human Factors , 46 (1):50–80, 2004. Dirk Leffrang and Oliver M¨ uller. Visualizing uncertainty in time series forecasts: The impact of uncertainty visu-alization on users’ confidence, algorithmic advice uti-lization, and forecasting performance. Journal of Fore-casting , 44(4):1235–1246, 2025. Daria Mikhaylova, Tommaso Turchi, and Alessio Malizia. How do we measure over-reliance? A unified proba-bilistic view. In Companion Proceedings of the 31st In-ternational Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces ,pages 66–69, 2026. Kathleen L Mosier and Linda J Skitka. Human decision makers and automated decision aids: Made for each other? In Automation and human performance , pages 201–220. CRC Press, 2018. Snehal Prabhudesai, Leyao Yang, Sumit Asthana, Xun Huan, Q Vera Liao, and Nikola Banovic. Understand-ing uncertainty: How lay decision-makers perceive and interpret uncertainty in human-AI decision making. In 

Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces , pages 379–396, 2023. Muhammad Raees, Vassilis-Javed Khan, Ioanna Lyk-ourentzou, and Konstantinos Papangelis. Do people ap-propriately rely on AI-advice? An analytical review of HCI research on human-AI decision-making. In Pro-ceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Fac-tors in Computing Systems , pages 1–24, 2026. Yaniv Romano, Evan Patterson, and Emmanuel Candes. Conformalized quantile regression. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 32, 2019. Sara Salimzadeh, Gaole He, and Ujwal Gadiraju. Dealing with uncertainty: Understanding the impact of prog-nostic versus diagnostic tasks on trust and reliance in human-AI decision making. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys-tems , pages 1–17, 2024. Max Schemmer, Niklas Kuehl, Carina Benz, Andrea Bar-tos, and Gerhard Satzger. Appropriate reliance on AI advice: Conceptualization and the effect of explana-tions. In Proceedings of the 28th International Con-ference on Intelligent User Interfaces , pages 410–422, 2023. Jakob Schoeffer, Maria De-Arteaga, and Niklas Kuehl. Explanations, fairness, and appropriate reliance in human-AI decision-making. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Comput-ing Systems , pages 1–18, 2024. Jakob Schoeffer, Johannes Jakubik, Michael V¨ ossing, Niklas K¨ uhl, and Gerhard Satzger. AI reliance and decision quality: Fundamentals, interdependence, and the effects of interventions. Journal of Artificial Intel-ligence Research , 82:471–501, 2025. Glenn Shafer and Vladimir Vovk. A tutorial on conformal prediction. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 9 (3), 2008. Sarah Sterz, Kevin Baum, Sebastian Biewer, Holger Her-manns, Anne Lauber-R¨ onsberg, Philip Meinel, and Markus Langer. On the quest for effectiveness in hu-man oversight: Interdisciplinary perspectives. In Pro-ceedings of the 2024 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency , pages 2495–2507, 2024. Heliodoro Tejeda, Aakriti Kumar, Padhraic Smyth, and Mark Steyvers. AI-assisted decision-making: A cog-nitive modeling approach to infer latent reliance strate-gies. Computational Brain & Behavior , 5(4):491–508, 2022. 12 PREPRINT 

Helena Vasconcelos, Matthew J¨ orke, Madeleine Grunde-McLaughlin, Tobias Gerstenberg, Michael S Bernstein, and Ranjay Krishna. Explanations can reduce overre-liance on AI systems during decision-making. Proceed-ings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction , 7 (CSCW1):1–38, 2023. Dongping Zhang, Angelos Chatzimparmpas, Negar Ka-mali, and Jessica Hullman. Evaluating the utility of conformal prediction sets for AI-advised image label-ing. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Hu-man Factors in Computing Systems , pages 1–19, 2024a. Zelun Tony Zhang, Felicitas Buchner, Yuanting Liu, and Andreas Butz. You can only verify when you know the answer: Feature-based explanations reduce overre-liance on AI for easy decisions, but not for hard ones. In Proceedings of Mensch und Computer 2024 , pages 156–170, 2024b. 13