Title: Scaling Participation in Modular AI Systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.07812v1

Published Time: Tue, 09 Jun 2026 00:13:51 GMT

Number of Pages: 32

Markdown Content:
# Scaling Participation in Modular AI Systems 

## Shangbin Feng 1* , Yike Wang 1, Weijia Shi 1, Luke Zettlemoyer 1,Yejin Choi 2, Yulia Tsvetkov 1

> 1

University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. 

> 2

Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): shangbin@cs.washington.edu; 

Abstract 

Humanity is a mosaic of multifaceted talents and needs, and any truly intelligent AI must reflect that richness. Yet the LLMs used by all are built by the few – a centralized market of monolithic AI models structurally ill-suited to capture the diversity of human knowl-edge, reasoning, and values. Here we introduce scaling participation , a new paradigm in which modular AI systems are built from the bottom up through the contributions of diverse stakeholders. Participants contribute small models trained on their own interests and priorities; these models then collaborate in modular frameworks as compositional AI systems. Participatory AI systems outperform monolithic LLMs by up to 15.4% across 15 tasks, such as reasoning and factuality, surpassing models larger than all contributed components combined. Further experiments show that participatory AI systems benefit from contributor diversity, substantially improve on each contributor’s original priorities, and exhibit emergent capabilities that allow them to solve over 15% of problems where all individual models fail. Scaling participation provides a technical foundation for tran-sitioning from the monolithic status quo toward an open, bottom-up, and collaborative AI future.  

> Keywords: large language models, participatory AI, model collaboration

# 1 Introduction 

As AI becomes more deeply intertwined with society’s institutions – guiding decisions in policy [1], education [2], healthcare [3], economy [4], science [5, 6], and even warfare [7] – it becomes crucial that AI meet society’s pluralistic needs. But today, AI’s promise and power are concentrated in the hands of a few private firms, embodied in black-box, monolithic models developed in secrecy. This makes democratic legitimacy difficult to sustain, because opaque models erode public trust, and monolithic systems developed on skewed data and benchmarks cannot credibly claim to represent and serve all citizens fairly [8, 9]. If these AI systems are to mediate decisions that affect everyone, they must be open to scrutiny and shaped through broader participation. This paper advances a new technical expression of an old democratic ideal: all should have a say in how the power that governs them is exercised. We propose a new approach: modular, participatory AI systems built to reflect the variety of the stakeholders they serve. We develop a framework in which many small and large models collaborate through explicit coordination algorithms. (Figure 1) It is modular because intel-ligence is composed from interacting components, rather than compressed into one model. It is participatory because both the component models and the mechanisms that govern their collaboration can be contributed by a broad range of stakeholders. This framework sets two 1

> arXiv:2606.07812v1 [cs.AI] 5 Jun 2026

Dense LLMs 

> e.g. Llama 3.1, Qwen 3, Olmo 3

Mixture-of-Experts LLMs 

> e.g. Qwen3MoE, OLMoE, DeepSeek-R1

Collaboratively Trained LLMs 

> e.g. Marin

Participatory AI: 

> Bottom-Up, Compositional LLM Systems

modularity,  participation 3 modularity,  participation 4

modularity,  participation 1 modularity,  participation 2Fig. 1 Overview of four paradigms of AI development. 1) Single dense LLMs are developed without modularity or participation: they employ monolithic neural architectures and are solely developed by a single organization. 2) Mixture-of-Experts LLMs employ modular model architectures, but all the modular compo-nents are still solely developed by a single entity. 3) Initiatives such as Marin [10] take a participatory approach in the model training pipeline, while all efforts are eventually merged into a single monolithic model. 4) Our work uniquely champions participatory AI, specifically scaling participation in modular AI systems: partic-ipants contribute specialized language models to build modular systems from the bottom up, where diverse stakeholders will have a say in the futuristic paradigm of bottom-up AI development. 

practical goals. The first is to develop collaboration methods that combine the strengths of diverse models and produce outcomes stronger than either any individual contributor or a monolithic frontier model alone. The second is to scale participation itself, so that many stake-holders can contribute models grounded in their own knowledge and priorities, allowing the system as a whole to be augmented in targeted ways for particular populations, domains, and objectives. We operationalize modular participatory AI by soliciting language models (LMs) released as academic research artifacts, as those are models designed with different architectures, trained on different domains, and represent diverse research agendas and priorities around the world, beyond mere commercial interests. With the 61 LMs obtained from decentralized con-tributors, we scale up diverse model collaboration systems where up to 32 LMs collaborate, compose, and complement each other as compositional AI systems. Specifically, these models act as modular components in 14 collaborative systems such as routing [11, 12], multi-agent debate [13, 14], and model fusion [15, 16], building bottom-up and participatory AI systems with these diverse contributions. Extensive experiments demonstrate that successful participatory AI systems outperform non-modular and/or non-participatory LLMs – some even larger than the 32 contributed LMs combined – by up to 15.4% across QA, reasoning, knowledge, safety, and instruction following tasks. Further analysis reveals that participatory AI is uniquely strong in representing human diversity, benefits from the diversity of contributed model pools, solves problems where the participating LMs struggle individually, and consistently improves on the original priorities and use cases of model contributors. Overall, scaling participation improves AI capability and creates systems that are more transparent, more pluralistic, easier to update, cheaper to reuse, and better able to show where outputs come from and who is responsible for them. Transitioning from centralized silos to participatory mosaics, scaling participation in modular 2AI offers a new paradigm for building state-of-the-art AI systems and a technical foundation for a more open, democratized, bottom-up, and collaborative AI future. 

# 2 Methods 

We propose to scale participation in modular AI systems with two steps: 1) soliciting partici-pation, recruiting specialized language models trained in the wild as modular building blocks; 2) orchestrating participation, building bottom-up and compositional AI systems with these models and diverse model collaboration algorithms. 

Soliciting Participation We prototype participatory AI with language models trained as academic research artifacts: these models are generally specialized and represent the diverse priorities of the AI research agenda around the world. Specifically, to curate a pool of language models, we reach out to academic labs working on language models and natural language processing and ask for their participation by submitting the language models they trained in their research. We specifically employ the form in Figure 2 to inform contributors of our objec-tive, collect information about their model and research. By reaching out to 236 researchers around the world, we curate a pool of 61 models: the collaboration of these models will enable bottom-up and compositional AI systems built with the contributions of diverse stakeholders. 

Orchestrating Participation We employ a wide spectrum of model collaboration algorithms to prototype participatory AI, where models trained by diverse stakeholders collaborate, com-pose, and complement each other. Specifically, we employ 14 collaborative systems across three levels of information exchange across language models. [9] We provide details for each collaborative algorithm in Appendix B. For API-level collaboration , featuring the routing and selection among candidate models: 

• Prompt Routing Given a user instruction, we prompt an LLM to select the most fitting candidate model based on model descriptions provided by participants. 

• Trained Router We evaluate all candidate models on a development set and determine the best model for each instruction. We then train a causal language model to learn to predict the best model for each instruction. At inference time, the trained router model dynamically assigns instructions to candidate models based on its predictions. [11] 

• Graph Routing Similar to Trained Router, but a graph neural network is employed as the neural architecture for routing prediction, specifically by representation learning on a task-instruction-model network. [12] 

• Switch Generation Instead of selecting one model to generate the full response, we train a switcher model to govern how multiple candidate models take turns to generate text patches towards a full response, whenever the skills and strengths of a particular model are most needed. [17] For text-level collaboration , featuring the exchange of generated texts across models: 

• Multi-Agent Refine Each candidate model first independently generates a response, then refines its response based on the responses from other models. After a few iterations, an LLM is instructed to summarize all models’ responses in the last iteration. [13] 

• Multi-Agent Finetuning A training-based enhancement of multi-agent refine, where both generation and critique datasets are generated in the iterative process to fine-tune candidate models. At inference-time, the finetuned and adapted models generate responses and aggregate through majority vote. [18] 

• LLM Blender All candidate models first independently generate responses, we then train a ranker LLM to rank the responses and train a fuser LLM to aggregate the top-k responses into a final response. [19] 3Fig. 2 Soliciting Participation. The form we used to solicit participation from academics around the world, asking for the language model they trained and released for diverse topics about AI. We are continuing to collect responses at https://yikee.github.io/open-model-collaboration/. 

• AggLM An aggregator LLM is trained with reinforcement learning with verifiable rewards to balance “easy” cases where majority vote succeeds and “hard” cases, where minority answer recovery is required. At inference time, all candidate models independently generate responses and are processed by the aggregator LLM for a final response. [20] 

• Sparta Alignment Two candidate models enter a contest of instruction following and other candidate models evaluate their responses. The winning model would gain in reputa-tion and vice versa, where the reputation of models indicates the weight of their judgments when evaluating other models’ responses. All models are trained on the (winning response, losing response) pairs obtained in collective judgement through preference optimization. [14] 

• Heterogeneous Swarms We orchestrate multiple candidate models in a directed acyclic graph (DAG), where one model’s output becomes part of another model’s input based on directed edges. We maintain a population of k DAGs and employ particle optimization on continuous adjacency matrices to optimize the graph-based collaboration structures. [21] For Weight-level collaboration , featuring the arithmetic and search with model parameters: 4• Dare-Ties Dare-Ties is a combination of two popular model merging techniques, focusing on pruning and the sign consensus of parameter values across multiple models. [15, 16] 

• Greedy Soup We first evaluate all candidate models on the development set and sort them in descending order of performance. Starting from the best model, we iteratively add the next model to the “soup” (the current pool of models being considered), average the weights of models in the soup, and evaluate the merged model on the development set. We retain the model if performance improves over the previous best, and move on to the next model. [22] 

• Weight Extrapolation (ExPO) We evaluate models on the development set, select the top-k and bottom-k performing models, and extrapolate their parameters into a new model with extrapolate with xexpo = xtop-k + α(xtop-k − xbottom-k ). [23] 

• Model Swarms Multiple candidate models collaboratively search in the model parameter space to improve performance on the development set, where the optimization is instantiated with particle swarm optimization, treating the pool of models as the population. [24] Please note that weight-level collaboration often requires participating models to share the same model architecture: we take one extra step to perform knowledge distillation [25] from the contributed models to the same model architecture, so that we unify the model architecture for weight-level methods while preserving the specialization of participating models. To sum up, we experiment with 61 models sourced from diverse academic research around the globe and 14 collaboration algorithms for bottom-up, compositional AI systems. To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first attempt at a modular and participatory approach towards AI development. 

# 3 Experiment Settings 

Data and Evaluation We evaluate models and systems across 5 domains and 15 tasks in total: general QA (AGIEval [26], ARC-challenge [27], MMLU-redux [28]), reasoning 

(BigBench-Hard [29], GSM8k [30], MATH [31], Sciriff [32]), knowledge (WikiDYK [33], 

PopQA [34], BLEND [35]), safety (TruthfulQA [36], CocoNot [37]), and instruction follow-ing (AlpacaEval [38], Wildchat [39], Human Interest [24]). For each task, we create a held-out split for model selection as well as a development and a test split for evaluation. We report the macro-average performance of tasks in each domain. 

Models and Implementation We first evaluate the 61 models contributed by diverse aca-demics (Section 2) on the mixture of held-out splits across tasks. Since we aim to scale collaborative systems up to 32 models, we retain the top 32 models as the default pool while employing other models for further analysis. To run weight-level collaboration where models usually need to share the same architecture, we employ knowledge distillation with each of the 32 models as teacher and Qwen-2.5-7B as student, to obtain distilled models representing the contributed models. We then build model collaboration systems with the first 2, 4, 8, 16, and 32 models in the pool: we specifically employ MoCo [40], a one-stop library for executing diverse model collaboration protocols, including the 14 frameworks in Section 2. 

Baselines We compare the bottom-up and collaborative AI systems with non-modular and non-participatory baselines. Since the median year where the contributed models are trained is 2024 , we mainly compare with state-of-the-art open models and systems in that time range for fair comparison. 1) No modularity, no participation : single dense LLMs including Llama 3.1 (8B, 70B, 405B) and Qwen 2.5 (7B, 14B, 32B, 72B); 2) Yes modularity, no participation : mixture-of-experts LLMs including Mixtral (8*7B, 8*22B) and Deepseek-MoE (16B, 236B-v2); 3) No modularity, yes participation : Marin (8B, 32B-base (post-trained version not yet available)). As the average size of our model pool is 5.32B, we are comparing with baselines that are larger than all participating models combined (Llama 3.1 405B and 5Setting general QA reasoning knowledge safety instruction following modularity ✗ 0.7850 0.7572 0.3483 0.5660 8.3623 participation ✗

modularity ✓ 0.7731 0.7226 0.3477 0.5952 7.1149 participation ✗

modularity ✗ 0.6242 0.5874 0.2671 0.5244 4.5601 participation ✓

modularity ✓, participation ✓ (ours) n=2 models 0.7518 0.7101 0.3356 0.6251 9.2252 n=4 models 0.7623 0.7257 0.3412 0.6414 9.4960 n=8 models 0.7782 0.7587 0.3473 0.6566 9.9835 n=16 models 0.7943 0.7889 0.3426 0.6785 11.6423 n=32 models 0.8126 0.7965 0.3703 0.6897 12.2237  

> Table 1 Summary of the best performance across each modular and participatory setting. Best setting in
> bold . By scaling participation in building modular AI systems from 2 models to 32 models, our proposed paradigm outperforms non-modular and/or no-participatory baselines by 15.42% on average.

Deepseek-MoE 236B, larger than 32 × 5.32B). We also compare with the best single model, the model in our pool that performs best on each specific task. If scaling up participation yields strong bottom-up, compositional systems that outperform these baselines, our work spearheads a new paradigm of modular, bottom-up, and participatory AI systems. 

# 4 Results 

We report the performance of diverse model collaboration systems and baselines in Figure 3 and a summary of results in Table 1. 

Overall Results By scaling participation through scaling the number of contributed mod-els, diverse model collaboration systems generally trend up by 28.78% on average from 2 to 32 models. The most successful collaborative systems outperform all baselines: even though 

Llama 3.1 405B (in the category of w/o modularity, w/o participation) is 2.38x the size of all 32 models combined, the best collaborative systems still outperform it by 17.15% on average across evaluation domains. This suggests that scaling participation via scaling model collaboration is a promising paradigm: bottom-up, compositional AI systems built with the contributions of diverse stakeholders could rival the centralized and monolithic status quo of AI development. 

Domain Insights The best model collaboration system outperforms the strongest baseline in each evaluation domain by 37.81% (instruction following), 15.88% (safety), 6.32% (knowl-edge), 5.19% (reasoning), 3.52% (general QA), in descending order. Aside from aggregate-level results, we also observe that there’s no one-size-fits-all collaboration system: multiagent refine 

[13], requiring models to debate and refine the answers of each other, achieves the best per-formance on reasoning but lags behind on instruction following; heterogeneous swarms [21], where models are organized in graph structures to divide and conquer problems, excel in gen-eral QA but lags behind on safety. This suggests that different types of collaborative systems 6Fig. 3 Results of Scaling Participation. Performance of diverse model collaboration systems and non-modular and/or non-participatory baselines. We report the best performance within each category of baselines as a horizontal dashed line (often the largest model in the category) and the scaling trend of model collaboration systems, from 2 models to 32 models contributed by diverse stakeholders. Graph routing and heterogeneous swarms do not have results for 2 models as 2 models do not constitute a graph network. Performance consis-tently trends up with the scaling of participation in building collaborative AI systems, with the most successful systems outperforming non-modular and/or non-participatory baselines by up to 15.4%. 

suit different domains and applications, where participants should carefully review and select based on their collective goal. 

Collaborative Systems API-level methods, featuring the routing and selection among can-didate models, are not very scalable, and performance may even degrade when introducing more models: as the model pool grows with participation, the strategy of shallow selection may be susceptible to noise and struggles to find the best individual model. In contrast, diverse models are more deeply integrated in text-level and weight-level collaboration, benefiting more from scaling participation, where all models have a chance to contribute their specialization and augment the compositional AI system. Scaling each collaborative system to 32 models, we calculate the ranking of methods in each evaluation domain and the top-3 ranked are: model swarms (avg. ranking #2, [24]), sparta alignment (avg. ranking #4.6, [14]), and multiagent finetuning (avg. ranking #5.4, [18]). These overall strongest approaches all involve training 

the parameters of participating models: this indicates that deeper integration of decentralized contributions are necessary for best utility, where models collectively evolve and adapt for diverse tasks and applications. 

# 5 Analysis 

Scaling Model Diversity Scaling participation via scaling model collaboration led to consis-tent improvements with larger and more diverse AI systems (Figure 3). Are the improvements merely due to spending more compute on the collaboration of more models, or are they also due to the increasing diversity and complementary strengths of contributed models? To dis-entangle the effect of compute and contribution diversity, we conduct a controlled experiment where collaborative systems are always built with 8 models, but models varying in different prongs of diversity. We follow the model ranking order in Section 3 to select eligible models. 7Setting 1 :From the same to distinct models   

> Setting 2 :Scaling the diversity of institutions
> Setting 3 :Scaling international collaboration
> Setting 4 :Scaling model generation diversity Fig. 4 Scaling Model Diversity. We investigate the impact of scaling model diversity by keeping the model pool size as eight, but employing increasingly diverse model compositions across four aspects. An average improvement of 13.8% from the least diverse to most diverse settings indicates that the successes of scaling participation are not only due to compute, but also crucially due to the diversity and complementary strengths of models contributed by diverse stakeholders.

• Setting 1: Distinct Models We employ settings of a × b where a distinct models are each repeated for b times in the pool. ( a × b = 8) Specifically, four model pools of 1 × 8, 2 × 4, 4 × 2, and 8 × 1 offer an increasing scale of diversity. 

• Setting 2: Diverse Institutions Among the pool of 61 models, researchers from the Uni-versity of Washington (UW) contributed the most. We investigate whether a compositional AI system built with cross-institution collaboration would be helpful. Specifically, we employ a pool of 8 UW models, 6 UW and 2 from other institutions, 4 and 4, as well as 1 from each institution: these pools offer a progressive scaling of multi-institution collaboration. 

• Setting 3: International Collaboration While most of the models were contributed by researchers in the United States, there are also models from international scholars. We investigate the case of international collaboration, with 8 US models, 6 US and 2 else, 4 and 4, as well as 2 and 6. We hope to understand whether the diverse research agenda and priorities around the globe would strengthen collaborative AI systems. 

• Setting 4: Generation Diversity An important measurement of model diversity is the diversity of their generated texts: we employ the inter-model homogeneity with the Infin-ityChat dataset [41], a repository of open-ended user questions, to evaluate the diversity of model pools. We draw random samples of 8 models from the whole pool 4 times, rank their diversity level based on inter-model homogeneity, and build collaborative systems with those models. We employ multi-agent refine, multi-agent finetuning, heterogeneous swarms, and model swarms as collaborative protocols to build AI systems with each model pool. We report perfor-mance for each model pool averaged across the four collaboration strategies in Figure 4. From the least to most diverse settings, we observe an average improvement of 13.8%, indicating that model diversity is crucial in the success of scaling participation. Across the four settings, the average improvement is 18.8% (setting 3), 18.0% (setting 2), 14.5% (setting 1), and 3.8% (setting 4), in descending order, indicating that diverse sources of contributed models are crit-ical in our success. Together, these results demonstrate that through scaling participation, 8Fig. 5 Evaluations on representing human diversity : representing diverse culture, values, and employing them for real-world human queries. We observe an even larger improvement over monolithic models compared to general-utility tasks in Figure 3, specifically 21.58% vs. 17.15%, indicating that participatory AI systems have the unique benefit of incorporating and holistically reflecting diverse values and preferences from decentralized contributions. 

diverse preferences and priorities about AI models are holistically reflected to build stronger AI systems. 

Evaluations on Reflecting Human Diversity In addition to excelling on general-purpose tasks (Section 4), we posit that the unique benefit of participatory AI systems is representing human diversity : as more models contributed by diverse stakeholders in AI join the system, the values, preferences, and priorities of them will be better reflected than monolithic models. We investigate this by evaluating participatory AI systems and the two largest baseline models on tasks about human diversity: CultureBench [42], a dataset of reasoning about cultural contexts; Value Kaleidoscope [43], a dataset of diverse values, rights, and duties: we specifically employ the Modular Pluralism evaluation setting [44] to test whether AI could help make value-laden decisions; InfinityChat [41], a dataset of open-ended user queries: we employ an 

open setting, where generations are evaluated by reward models, and a diversity setting, where models are evaluated by the inter-model homogeneity metric [41]. Together, these evaluations quantify how well models and systems represent diverse cultures, values, and employ those knowledge in real-world user queries. Results in Figure 5 demonstrate that: 1) scaling participation continues to yield promising trends on these tasks, improving from 2 to 32 models; 2) the improvements over large mono-lithic models are up to 21.58%, higher than the 17.15% on general-purpose tasks (Section 4). This indicates that by building bottom-up and collaborative AI systems and by incorporat-ing the diverse contributions from decentralized stakeholders in the wild, human diversity is naturally better reflected in the resulting AI systems. 

Collaborative Emergence In addition to what models are individually capable of, collabo-rative AI systems of multiple models could solve problems where individual models struggle, 

i.e., collaborative emergence. [40] This is due to collaborative systems tapping into the com-plementary strengths of diverse models and generalizing beyond their existing capabilities. To investigate whether collaborative emergence scales with participation, we calculate the percentage of problems that 1) all 32 models in the pool could not individually solve, and 2) collaborative systems of 2 to 32 models could now solve. Figure 6 demonstrates that col-laborative emergence is happening with participatory AI systems, and such emergence and generalization further scale with participation. This highlights a new possibility: that gener-alization doesn’t need to come from excessive scaling of a single model, but from scaling the collaboration and representation of diverse contributed models. 

Individual vs. Compositional Strength Current evaluations of AI models are mostly measuring individual strength : what models can and can not do when operating individually. However, with the emerging paradigm of collaborative and participatory AI, models are no longer merely relying on their own capabilities: it is time to measure and evaluate compositional 

9Fig. 6 Scaling collaborative emergence : for problems where all participating models could not individu-ally solve, what percentage of them are now solvable with collaborative systems of varying scales? We observe that such collaborative emergence scales with participation, indicating that the decentralized contributions from diverse stakeholders enhanced generalization beyond what individual models could do. 

strength , to what extent models are helpful when being employed in compositional systems. We take the first step towards this research question. Given a pool of n language models M = {m1, · · · , mn} and a dataset D, we quantify the individual and compositional strength of each model as follows: 

• Individual Strength : performance of model mi on dataset D, where mi individually tackles the problems in D.

• Compositional Strength : performance gain when model mi is added to a collaborative system. Specifically, Ec∼C

h

performance  c(M) | D  − performance  c(M\ mi) | D i

, where 

C indicates a set of possible collaboration algorithms. We use the top-8 models as M and investigate the correlation between individual and compositional strength with three collaboration algorithms and two datasets. Figure 7 demon-strates that in all 6 settings, individual and compositional strengths are not correlated , with the p-values of Pearson correlation consistently larger than 0.05 across all settings. While existing AI progress is razor-focused on evaluating and improving the individual strength of AI models, it is not guaranteed that they will be strong and helpful in future collaborative and participatory systems. It is thus time to go beyond the status quo of optimizing individ-ual strength to beat other models, but for research on evaluating and training AI mdoels by compositional strength. 

Getting Back to Participants Participatory AI will only be possible if diverse stakehold-ers contribute what they can to build bottom-up AI systems. We posit that one potential incentive for contributions is that the compositional systems they took part in developing will perform better on their original priorities that motivated them to develop their models, thereby advancing their objective at the same time. We invite contributors to an optional human evaluation, where we ask for the data they used to evaluate their individual models and conduct pairwise comparisons between responses from their model and the participatory system. Specifically: 

• Human Judge : directly asking the participant to judge which response is better. 

• LLM-as-a-Judge : By prompting Qwen-2.5-7B asking “Question: Answer A: Answer B: Please judge which answer is better, A or B, or if it is a tie.” , we infer the quality preference of responses. 

• Reward Model : By employing reward models to evaluate the input and output pairs, specifically Skywork/Skywork-Reward-Llama-3.1-8B-v0.2 , we compare the reward scores of the two responses. Note that there is usually no tie under reward models, as they give continuous scalar scores to LLM responses. 10 Fig. 7 Individual and Compositional Strength. Correlation between the individual and compositional strength of LLMs across three collaborative systems and two datasets, shaded area represents the 95% con-fidence interval for the regression. We observe that individual and compositional strengths are mostly not correlated (with p-values consistently larger than 0.05), indicating that evaluating and training AI models for compositional strength and collaborative systems is an independent and critical research question. 

Fig. 8 Evaluation on Participants’ Domains. Evaluation on domains where participants originally trained their models, comparing the contributed model and the compositional system. Three types of evalua-tions, including direct human evaluation by the participants, confirm that the compositional AI systems they took part in building also advances their goals. 

Results in Figure 8 demonstrate that the participatory and compositional AI systems advance on objectives that participants were originally pursuing: this suggests that contribut-ing to a participatory system is not only a selfless act for an open and collaborative AI future, by also benefits participants by developing systems better equipped to address their needs and priorities. 

# 6 Discussion 

Safety of Participatory AI Systems In this work, we prototype participatory AI with bottom-up, collaborative AI systems built with the contributions of global academics. To bring this paradigm to the wild, we need to account for the safety risks of decentralized contributions. For example, what if some of the contributed models are intentionally or unintentionally 11 biased or malicious? We need future research on designing guardrails and ensuring the safety of bottom-up, participatory AI systems [45]. 

Compatible with the Status Quo Existing collaborative development protocols such as Git-theta [46] and Marin [10] often require extra effort to engage, where participants need to change their existing workflow and make adaptations. In comparison, participatory AI is seamlessly compatible with the status quo of open-source activities in AI, as more than 2 million models are already publicly availble on Huggingface [47] representing diverse interests and priorities. AI stakeholders could continue to develop their individual model, and the only effort needed is to give consent to use their model in participatory AI systems. This incurs much less burden for collaborative development, efficiently reusing and repurposing existing progress in AI. 

Facilitate Contributions We propose to scale participation via scaling model collaboration, since model sharing is the default open-source activity in AI. However, not everyone knows how to train a model , especially for those who are underrepresented in the AI status quo. We need future research on facilitating diverse contributions from populations with less AI literacy, potentially through natural language-based interfaces to develop and contribute diverse models via annotation, feedback, and other user-friendly forms of contribution [48]. 

Reduce Unilateral Decision Making No one will have unilateral control over participatory AI systems: since diverse stakeholders all contributed to the system, they also collectively own this artifact. As a result, the community of stakeholders jointly decides on important matters about this AI system, such as how to deploy it, which use cases are allowed and not, etc. Participatory AI uniquely champions the AI future where collective decision making helps to de-risk the consequences of AI in high-stakes domains. 

Economic Incentives We envision important socio-technical research on designing economic incentives to facilitate the transition to participatory AI systems. For example, if we have fair attribution algorithms to quantify each model’s contribution to a compositional system, the proceeds of participatory AI systems could be proportionally distributed to those contributors. This will in turn draw more effort towards the participatory paradigm, turbocharging the transition from unilateral and monolithic models to bottom-up and compositional systems. 

# 7 Related Work 

Democratizing AI Research to democratize AI spans the full lifecycle of AI models, from model training, inference, deployment, and its societal impacts, with four specific sub-areas [49–51]: democratizing AI governance, which focuses on building systems and infrastructures to ensure the development and usage of AI systems reflect the preferences of the general public. This line of research focuses on building socio-technical systems [52, 53] to encourage public participation [54], rein in unilateral control [55], and ensure the justice and fairness of AI-related decision making [56]; democratizing AI development, which focuses on collabora-tive and decentralized development of AI models. This line of research focuses on modular models and systems [57, 58], the pluralistic alignment of AI models [8, 59, 60], and protocols of collaborative development [10, 46, 61]. There are additional discussions about the democ-ratization of AI usage [62] and profits [63]. Our work focuses on the democratization of AI development: existing proposals for collaborative development mostly feature new initiatives that require non-trivial effort for participation [10, 46] (e.g., moving to a new experimental framework, making major changes to existing code and training procedures), while our pro-posal of scaling participation in modular AI systems is uniquely compatible with the status 12 quo: people, academics, and communities around the world have been training language mod-els that represent their priorities and sharing them with the world 1. With a bottom-up and compositional AI system featuring the collaboration of these diverse language models con-tributed by different people, we could efficiently reuse existing progress in AI and pose little to no barrier for participation from any open model and its stakeholders. 

Model Collaboration Model collaboration is a family of algorithms towards building AI systems through compositional generative modeling, where multiple machine learning mod-els collaborate, compose, and complement each other through diverse collaboration protocols [9, 40]. The collaboration of diverse large language models could be categorized into four levels, based on where and how information exchange happens across models: API-level collaboration 

features the routing [11, 12] and cascading [64, 65] among multiple LLMs, aiming to select the most fitting and efficiency LM for diverse user queries; Text-level collaboration features collab-orative problem solving [66], competition and debate [13, 18], response aggregation [19, 20], and other paradigms for models to communicate via generated texts; Logit-level collabora-tion employs arithmetic on next-token probability distributions for collaborative decoding with multiple language models [67, 68]; Weight-level collaboration features model merging [69], arithmetic with model parameters [23, 24], and modular architectures [57]. While these algorithms are previously validated with in-house models, we bring them to the wild: diverse language models contributed by decentralized stakeholders collaborate to form bottom-up compositional AI systems, turbocharging their potential to build an open and participatory AI future. 

# 8 Conclusion 

We propose to scale participation in modular AI, where AI systems are built with bottom-up contributions from diverse stakeholders. We prototype participatory AI by scaling model col-laboration, where up to 32 models trained by different researchers collaborate as compositional AI systems. Participatory AI outperforms monolithic baselines by up to 15.4% across diverse tasks, especially improving on representing human diversity. These bottom-up compositional systems benefit from the diversity of model contributions, where new skills emerge to solve problems that individual models struggle with. Scaling participation spearheads a new way to develop state-of-the-art AI systems, a new deal for an open, bottom-up, and collaborative AI future. 

# References 

[1] Ingrams, A., Kaufmann, W., Jacobs, D.: In ai we trust? citizen perceptions of ai in government decision making. Policy & Internet 14 (2), 390–409 (2022) [2] Educational Technology, U.S.D.o.E.: Artificial Intelligence and the Future of Teaching and Learning: Insights and Recommendations. Accessed: 2026-04-08 (2023). https:// www.ed.gov/sites/ed/files/documents/ai-report/ai-report.pdf [3] Chinta, S.V., et al. : Ai-driven healthcare: A review on ensuring fairness and mitigating bias. PLOS Digital Health 4(5), 0000864 (2025) [4] Bughin, J., Seong, J., Manyika, J., Chui, M., Joshi, R.: Notes from the ai frontier: Modeling the impact of ai on the world economy. McKinsey Global Institute 4(1), 2–61 (2018) [5] Asai, A., et al.: Synthesizing scientific literature with retrieval-augmented language models. Nature, 1–7 (2026) 

> 1As of March 19, 2026, there are 2,721,509 open models on Huggingface [47], a popular model sharing infrastructure.

13 [6] Lu, C., et al. : Towards end-to-end automation of ai research. Nature 651 (8107), 914–919 (2026) [7] Anthropic: Statement from Dario Amodei on our discussions with the Depart-ment of War. Accessed: 2026-04-01 (2026). https://www.anthropic.com/news/ statement-department-of-war [8] Sorensen, T., et al. : Position: A roadmap to pluralistic alignment. In: Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning (2024) [9] Feng, S., et al.: When one llm drools, multi-llm collaboration rules. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.04506 (2025) [10] Marin Community: Marin: An Open Lab for Building Foundation Models Together. Accessed: 2026-03-19 (2025). https://marin.community/ [11] Ong, I., et al. : Routellm: Learning to route llms from preference data. In: The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (2025) [12] Feng, T., Shen, Y., You, J.: Graphrouter: A graph-based router for llm selections. In: The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (2025) [13] Du, Y., Li, S., Torralba, A., Tenenbaum, J.B., Mordatch, I.: Improving factuality and reasoning in language models through multiagent debate. In: Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning (2023) [14] Jiang, Y., Ding, W., Feng, S., Durrett, G., Tsvetkov, Y.: Sparta alignment: Collec-tively aligning multiple language models through combat. In: The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (2025) [15] Yadav, P., Tam, D., Choshen, L., Raffel, C.A., Bansal, M.: Ties-merging: Resolving interference when merging models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (2023) [16] Yu, L., Yu, B., Yu, H., Huang, F., Li, Y.: Language models are super mario: Absorbing abilities from homologous models as a free lunch. In: Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning (2024) [17] Feng, S., et al.: Don’t throw away your pretrained model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.09913 (2025) [18] Subramaniam, V., et al. : Multiagent finetuning: Self improvement with diverse reasoning chains. In: The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (2025) [19] Jiang, D., Ren, X., Lin, B.Y.: Llm-blender: Ensembling large language models with pairwise ranking and generative fusion. In: Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (2023) [20] Zhao, W., et al.: The majority is not always right: Rl training for solution aggregation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.06870 (2025) [21] Feng, S., et al. : Heterogeneous swarms: Jointly optimizing model roles and weights for multi-llm systems. In: The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (2025) [22] Wortsman, M., et al. : Model soups: averaging weights of multiple fine-tuned models 14 improves accuracy without increasing inference time. In: The Thirty-Ninth International Conference on Machine Learning (2022) [23] Zheng, C., Wang, Z., Ji, H., Huang, M., Peng, N.: Weak-to-strong extrapolation expe-dites alignment. In: ICML 2024 Workshop on Models of Human Feedback for AI Alignment (2024) [24] Feng, S., et al. : Model swarms: Collaborative search to adapt llm experts via swarm intelligence. In: Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning (2025) [25] Kim, Y., Rush, A.M.: Sequence-level knowledge distillation. In: Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (2016) [26] Zhong, W., et al. : Agieval: A human-centric benchmark for evaluating foundation models. In: Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2024 (2024) [27] Clark, P., et al.: Think you have solved question answering? try arc, the ai2 reasoning challenge. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.05457 (2018) [28] Gema, A.P., et al. : Are we done with mmlu? In: Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (2025) [29] Suzgun, M., et al. : Challenging big-bench tasks and whether chain-of-thought can solve them. In: Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 (2023) [30] Cobbe, K., et al.: Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168 (2021) [31] Hendrycks, D., et al. : Measuring mathematical problem solving with the MATH dataset. In: The Thirty-fifth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (2021) [32] Wadden, D., et al. : Sciriff: A resource to enhance language model instruction-following over scientific literature. In: Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (2025) [33] Zhang, Y., et al.: Bidirectional lms are better knowledge memorizers? a benchmark for real-world knowledge injection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.12306 (2025) [34] Mallen, A., et al. : When not to trust language models: Investigating effectiveness of parametric and non-parametric memories. In: Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (2023) [35] Myung, J., et al. : Blend: A benchmark for llms on everyday knowledge in diverse cultures and languages. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37 , 78104–78146 (2024) [36] Lin, S., Hilton, J., Evans, O.: Truthfulqa: Measuring how models mimic human false-hoods. In: Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (2022) [37] Brahman, F., et al. : The art of saying no: Contextual noncompliance in language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37 , 49706–49748 (2024) 15 [38] Dubois, Y., et al. : Alpacafarm: A simulation framework for methods that learn from human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 , 30039–30069 (2023) [39] Zhao, W., et al. : Wildchat: 1m chatgpt interaction logs in the wild. In: The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations (2024) [40] Feng, S., et al.: Moco: A one-stop shop for model collaboration research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.21257 (2026) [41] Jiang, L., et al. : Artificial hivemind: The open-ended homogeneity of language mod-els (and beyond). In: The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (2025) [42] Chiu, Y.Y., et al. : Culturalbench: A robust, diverse and challenging benchmark for measuring lms’ cultural knowledge through human-ai red-teaming. In: Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (2025) [43] Sorensen, T., et al. : Value kaleidoscope: Engaging ai with pluralistic human values, rights, and duties. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 38, pp. 19937–19947 (2024) [44] Feng, S., et al. : Modular pluralism: Pluralistic alignment via multi-llm collaboration. In: Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (2024) [45] Yang, Z., Ding, W., Feng, S., Tsvetkov, Y.: Among us: Measuring and mitigating mali-cious contributions in model collaboration systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.05176 (2026) [46] Kandpal, N., et al. : Git-theta: A git extension for collaborative development of machine learning models. In: The Fortieth International Conference on Machine Learning (2023) [47] Wolf, T., et al. : Transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. In: Proceed-ings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations (2020) [48] Viswanathan, V., Zhao, C., Bertsch, A., Wu, T., Neubig, G.: Prompt2model: Generating deployable models from natural language instructions. In: Proceedings of the 2023 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations (2023) [49] Seger, E., Ovadya, A., Siddarth, D., Garfinkel, B., Dafoe, A.: Democratising ai: Multiple meanings, goals, and methods. In: Proceedings of the 2023 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, pp. 715–722 (2023) [50] Subramonian, A., Gautam, V., Klakow, D., Talat, Z.: Understanding “democratization” in nlp and ml research. In: Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (2024) [51] The Collective Intelligence Project: A Roadmap to Democratic AI. Accessed: 2026-03-26 (2024). https://static1.squarespace.com/static/631d02b2dfa9482a32db47ec/t/ 65f9a1296f1a357e918f7a58/1722968408230/CIP +A+Roadmap+to+Democratic+AI. pdf [52] Laux, J., Wachter, S., Mittelstadt, B.: Three pathways for standardisation and ethical 16 disclosure by default under the european union artificial intelligence act. Computer Law & Security Review 53 , 105957 (2024) [53] Ovadya, A., et al. : Position: Democratic ai is possible. the democracy levels frame-work shows how it might work. In: Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning Position Paper Track (2025) [54] Ter-Minassian, L.: Democratizing ai governance: balancing expertise and public partic-ipation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.08651 (2025) [55] Roose, K.: A coming-out party for generative A.I., silicon valley’s new craze. The New York Times (2022). Accessed Accessed: 2026-03-19 [56] Kalluri, P.: Don’t ask if artificial intelligence is good or fair, ask how it shifts power. Nature 583 (7815), 169–169 (2020) [57] Shi, W., et al. : Flexolmo: Open language models for flexible data use. In: The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (2025) [58] Zhou, Q., et al.: Democratizing ai through model fusion: A comprehensive review and future directions. Nexus, 100102 (2025) [59] Steingr¨ uber, A., Baum, K.: Justifications for democratizing ai alignment and their prospects. In: International Conference on Bridging the Gap Between AI and Reality, pp. 146–159 (2025) [60] Huang, L.T.-L., Papyshev, G., Wong, J.K.: Democratizing value alignment: From authoritarian to democratic ai ethics. AI and Ethics 5(1), 11–18 (2025) [61] Borzunov, A., et al. : Petals: Collaborative inference and fine-tuning of large models. In: Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (2023) [62] Yu, D., Rosenfeld, H., Gupta, A.: The ‘ai divide’between the global north and global south. In: World Economic Forum, vol. 16 (2023). . [63] Miller, K.: Radical Proposal: Universal Basic Income to Offset Job Losses Due to Automation. Stanford University Human-Centered Artificial Intel-ligence (HAI). Accessed: 2026-03-19 (2021). https://hai.stanford.edu/news/ radical-proposal-universal-basic-income-offset-job-losses-due-automation [64] Dohan, D., et al.: Language model cascades. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.10342 (2022) [65] Chen, L., Zaharia, M., Zou, J.: Frugalgpt: How to use large language models while reducing cost and improving performance. Transactions on Machine Learning Research (2025) [66] Guo, T., et al. : Large language model based multi-agents: a survey of progress and chal-lenges. In: Proceedings of the Thirty-Third International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (2024) [67] Liu, A., Han, X., Wang, Y., Tsvetkov, Y., Choi, Y., Smith, N.A.: Tuning language models by proxy. In: First Conference on Language Modeling (2024) [68] Shen, Z., Lang, H., Wang, B., Kim, Y., Sontag, D.: Learning to decode collaboratively with multiple language models. In: Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the 17 Association for Computational Linguistics (2024) [69] Yadav, P., et al.: A survey on model moerging: Recycling and routing among specialized experts for collaborative learning. Transactions on Machine Learning Research (2024) [70] Shao, Z., et al.: Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300 (2024) [71] Goddard, C., et al. : Arcee’s mergekit: A toolkit for merging large language models. In: Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: Industry Track (2024) [72] Pham, C.M., Chang, Y., Iyyer, M.: Clipper: Compression enables long-context synthetic data generation. In: Second Conference on Language Modeling (2025) [73] Qian, C., et al. : Toolrl: Reward is all tool learning needs. In: The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (2025) [74] Li, Z., et al. : In-the-flow agentic system optimization for effective planning and tool use. In: NeurIPS 2025 Workshop on Efficient Reasoning (2025) [75] Zhang, M., et al. : Ladder-residual: Parallelism-aware architecture for accelerating large model inference with communication overlapping. In: The Forty-Second International Conference on Machine Learning (2025) [76] Viswanathan, V., et al. : Checklists are better than reward models for aligning language models. In: The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (2025) [77] Xiao, E., et al.: Prompt-mii: Meta-learning instruction induction for llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.16932 (2025) [78] Wang, L., Jiang, Z., Liu, A., Van Durme, B.: Always tell me the odds: Fine-grained conditional probability estimation. In: Second Conference on Language Modeling (2025) [79] Liu, G.K.-M., Shi, B., Caciularu, A., Szpektor, I., Cohan, A.: Mdcure: A scalable pipeline for multi-document instruction-following. In: Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (2025) [80] Muennighoff, N., et al. : Generative representational instruction tuning. In: The Thir-teenth International Conference on Learning Representations (2024) [81] Song, L., Shi, T., Zhao, J.: The hallucination tax of reinforcement finetuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.13988 (2025) [82] Guo, G., et al. : Care: Multilingual human preference learning for cultural awareness. In: Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (2025) [83] Tang, L., Laban, P., Durrett, G.: Minicheck: Efficient fact-checking of llms on grounding documents. In: Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (2024) [84] Wei, K., Abdullah, H.M., Huang, R.: Mitigating gender bias via fostering exploratory thinking in llms. In: Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 (2025) 18 [85] Jiang, P., et al. : Deepretrieval: Hacking real search engines and retrievers with large lan-guage models via reinforcement learning. In: Second Conference on Language Modeling (2025) [86] Tan, Z., et al. : Aligning large language models with implicit preferences from user-generated content. In: Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (2025) [87] Wang, H., et al. : Offline reinforcement learning for llm multi-step reasoning. In: Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 (2025) [88] Jin, B., et al. : Search-r1: Training llms to reason and leverage search engines with reinforcement learning. In: Second Conference on Language Modeling (2025) [89] Sun, J., Zhong, X., Zhou, S., Han, J.: Dynamicrag: Leveraging outputs of large language model as feedback for dynamic reranking in retrieval-augmented generation. In: The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (2025) [90] Cheng, Z., et al. : Revisiting reinforcement learning for llm reasoning from a cross-domain perspective. In: The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (2025) [91] Liu, B., et al.: Spiral: Self-play on zero-sum games incentivizes reasoning via multi-agent multi-turn reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.24119 (2025) [92] Gu, J.-C., et al.: Brief-pro: Universal context compression with short-to-long synthesis for fast and accurate multi-hop reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.13799 (2025) [93] Wen, X., Mo, W.J., Xie, Y., Qi, P., Chen, M.: Towards policy-compliant agents: Learn-ing efficient guardrails for policy violation detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.03485 (2025) [94] Huan, M., et al.: Does math reasoning improve general llm capabilities? understanding transferability of llm reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.00432 (2025) [95] Wang, Y., et al. : Reinforcement learning for reasoning in large language models with one training example. In: The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (2025) [96] Zhao, X., Kang, Z., Feng, A., Levine, S., Song, D.: Learning to reason without external rewards. In: 2nd AI for Math Workshop (2025) [97] Li, A., Liu, Y., Sarkar, A., Downey, D., Cohan, A.: Demystifying scientific problem-solving in llms by probing knowledge and reasoning. In: First Workshop on Foundations of Reasoning in Language Models (2025) [98] Guha, E.K., et al. : Openthoughts: Data recipes for reasoning models. In: First Workshop on Foundations of Reasoning in Language Models (2025) [99] Aggarwal, P., Welleck, S.: L1: Controlling how long a reasoning model thinks with reinforcement learning. In: Second Conference on Language Modeling (2025) [100] Wu, F., et al.: Deepsearch: Overcome the bottleneck of reinforcement learning with verifiable rewards via monte carlo tree search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.25454 (2025) [101] Wei, J.T.-Z., et al.: Hubble: a model suite to advance the study of llm memorization. 19 arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.19811 (2025) [102] Yin, F., Ye, X., Durrett, G.: Lofit: Localized fine-tuning on llm representations. Advances in neural information processing systems 37 , 9474–9506 (2024) [103] Li, A., et al.: Zebra-cot: A dataset for interleaved vision language reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.16746 (2025) [104] Ranjit, J., et al. : Oath-frames: Characterizing online attitudes towards homelessness with llm assistants. In: Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (2024) [105] Sorensen, T., et al. : Spectrum tuning: Post-training for distributional coverage and in-context steerability. In: The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations (2026) [106] Ginn, M., et al. : Glosslm: A massively multilingual corpus and pretrained model for interlinear glossed text. In: Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (2024) [107] Liu, A., et al. : Superbpe: Space travel for language models. In: Second Conference on Language Modeling (2025) [108] Liu, Z., et al. : Protecting privacy in multimodal large language models with mllmu-bench. In: Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (2025) [109] Dai, W., Chen, P., Ekbote, C., Liang, P.P.: Qoq-med: Building multimodal clinical foundation models with domain-aware grpo training. In: The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (2025) [110] Lu, Y., Ziems, N., Dang, H., Jiang, M.: Optimizing decomposition for optimal claim verification. In: Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (2025) [111] Shao, R., et al. : Reasonir: Training retrievers for reasoning tasks. In: Second Conference on Language Modeling (2025) [112] Balepur, N., et al. : Whose boat does it float? improving personalization in preference tuning via inferred user personas. In: Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (2025) [113] Yang, G., Ebert, V., Tamer, N.C., Pozzobon, L.A., Smith, N.A.: Legato: Large-scale end-to-end generalizable approach to typeset omr. In: AI for Music Workshop (2025) [114] An, L., Liu, Y., Liu, Y., Zhang, Y., Bu, Y., Chang, S.: Defending llm watermarking against spoofing attacks with contrastive representation learning. In: Second Conference on Language Modeling (2025) [115] Liu, J., et al.: Mimicking the physicist’s eye: A vlm-centric approach for physics formula discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.17380 (2025) [116] Zaman, K., Srivastava, S.: A causal lens for evaluating faithfulness metrics. In: Pro-ceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (2025) 20 [117] Shen, Y.J., Xia, Y., Chang, J.D., Ammanabrolu, P.: Simultaneous multi-objective alignment across verifiable and non-verifiable rewards. In: The 5th Workshop on Mathematical Reasoning and AI (2025) [118] Sun, K., Dredze, M.: Amuro & char: Analyzing the relationship between pre-training and fine-tuning of large language models. In: Proceedings of the 10th Workshop on Representation Learning for NLP, pp. 131–151 (2025) [119] Li, Z., et al.: Self-rewarding vision-language model via reasoning decomposition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.19652 (2025) [120] OLMo, T., et al.: 2 olmo 2 furious. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.00656 (2024) [121] White, I., et al.: Collaborating action by action: A multi-agent llm framework for embodied reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.17950 (2025) [122] Huang, Y., Chen, S., Cai, H., Dhingra, B.: To trust or not to trust? enhancing large language models’ situated faithfulness to external contexts. In: The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (2025) [123] Chen, T., Asai, A., Zettlemoyer, L., Hajishirzi, H., Brahman, F.: Train for truth, keep the skills: Binary retrieval-augmented reward mitigates hallucinations. In: Socially Responsible and Trustworthy Foundation Models at NeurIPS 2025 (2025) [124] Liu, Y., et al. : Harnessllm: Automatic testing harness generation via reinforcement learning. In: NeurIPS 2025 Fourth Workshop on Deep Learning for Code (2025) [125] Ismayilzada, M., Laverghetta, A., Luchini, S.A., Patel, R., Bosselut, A., Plas, L., Beaty, R.E.: Creative preference optimization. Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 (2025) [126] Liu, W., et al.: Dr. kernel: Reinforcement learning done right for triton kernel generations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.05885 (2026) [127] Resck, L., Raimundo, M.M., Poco, J.: Exploring the trade-off between model per-formance and explanation plausibility of text classifiers using human rationales. In: Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2024, pp. 4190–4216 (2024) [128] Li, M., Gurung, A., Saparina, I., Lapata, M.: Who gets cited most? benchmarking long-context reasoning on scientific articles. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.21028 (2025) [129] AlKhamissi, B., et al.: Mixture of cognitive reasoners: Modular reasoning with brain-like specialization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13331 (2025) 21 Funding Statement 

This research was developed in part with funding from the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency’s (DARPA) SciFy program (Agreement No. HR00112520300). The views expressed are those of the author and do not reflect the official policy or position of the Department of Defense or the U.S. Government. This research was supported by the Coeffi-cient Giving and Amazon Health. Shangbin Feng would like to thank the support of the IBM PhD Fellowship, the Jane Street Graduate Research Fellowship, and the NVIDIA Graduate Fellowship. 

# Author Contributions 

S.F. led the project. Conception and design: every author. Soliciting participation: Y.W. and S.F. Result and evaluation: S.F. Result visualization: Y.W. and S.F. Advisory: L.Z., Y.C., and Y.T. All authors contributed to manuscript writing and editing. 

# Competing interests 

The authors declare no competing interests. 

# A List of Participation 

By sending out questionnaires (Figure 2) asking for language models trained in academic research around the world, we obtain 61 open models representing diverse interests and pri-orities. We are grateful to all who participated in building this new paradigm of bottom-up, compositional AI and credit them in Tables 5 to 9. 

# B Experiment Details 

## B.1 Collabroative Algorithms Details 

We employ the implementations of diverse model collaboration algorithms in MoCo [40], a one-stop shop for model collaboration research. We provide details for each algorithm and follow the default settings in MoCo unless otherwise stated. Code and data are available at https://github.com/BunsenFeng/model collaboration. 

• Prompt Routing We employ the best LLM on the development set as the routing model. We then employ the following prompt format with this model to route queries: “You are an AI assistant that routes user questions to the most suitable AI model based on their descrip-tions. User question: [question] Model descriptions: 1: [description 1] ... n: [description n] Based on the above descriptions, which model is best suited to answer the user’s question? Respond with the model number only.” 

• Trained Router We employ Qwen/Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct to initialize router train-ing, and employ the reward model Skywork/Skywork-Reward-Llama-3.1-8B-v0.2 to score candidate responses from all models and decide on the best model to generate router training data. The prompt format for router training is: “You are an AI assistant tasked with choosing the best model to answer the user’s question based on the model descriptions. Model descriptions: 1: [description 1] ... n: [description n] question: [question] Based on the model descriptions, choose the best model (1-n) to answer the question.” We LoRA fine-tune the router on all routing labels generated with the development set for 5 epochs with learning rate 1 e − 5 and effective batch size 32. 22 • Graph Routing We employ the graph neural architecture in [12] as the router model. Specifically, we employ SentenceTransformer to extract features from query, model descrip-tions, and evaluation data, and train the graph neural network with 8 hidden features, 1 e−4learning rate, 10 epochs, and batch size 32. 

• Switch Generation We employ Qwen/Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct to initialize the switcher LM and fine-tune it with 500 generated switching traces, 16 switching rollouts, and employ the reward model Skywork/Skywork-Reward-Llama-3.1-8B-v0.2 to guide the selec-tion of rollouts. At inference time, the switcher is called every 25 tokens to decide which model is best suited to generate the next patch of 25 tokens. 

• Multi-Agent Refine Models employ the following prompt format to refine their own responses based on their models’ responses: “You are part of a team of AI assistants col-laborating to answer the user’s question. Each assistant provides their own answer: use their answers to refine and improve your own answer. Question: [question] Your previous answer: [answer] Other assistants’ answers: - [answer 1] ... - [answer n-1] Please provide a refined answer to the question.” 

• Multi-Agent Finetuning We employ 2 rounds of multi-agent finetuning where the supervised fine-tuning has 1 training epoch, 16 effective batch size, and 1 e − 5 learning rate. 

• LLM Blender We initialize both the ranker and fuser LM as Qwen/Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct , and send the top-3 responses decided by the ranker to the fuser for response aggregation. 

• AggLM We employ the following prompt format for the aggregator LM: “### Problem begin [problem] ### Problem end and these solution attempts: [answer 1] ... [answer n] It is possible that any, all, or none of these solutions are correct or complete. Carefully review the provided solutions, using them as starting points—correcting mistakes, filling in gaps, and/or combining useful ideas—to produce a final, comprehensive, and correct solution to the problem. Make sure to provide the final answer in the same format as the solutions.” 

We then initialize the aggregator as Qwen/Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct and employ GRPO [70] with 1 e − 4 learning rate, batch size 4, and 1 epoch for training. 

• Sparta Alignment We execute the competition, judging, and collective alignment process for 3 iterations, with 500 instructions for competition in each iteration and 3 opponents for each model. All models start with the same reputation and gradually evolve based on the outcomes of cross-model competitions. 

• Heterogeneous Swarms We employ a population of 5 LLM networks and execute the optimization process for 5 iterations, and use 0.2 inertia, 0.3 cognitive coefficient, 0.4 social coefficient, 0.05 repel coefficient, 0.5 step length, and 25% of development set for optimization in each iteration. 

• Dare-Ties We employ the MergeKit [71] implementation and assign equal weights to all models. 

• Greedy Soup We employ linear merging with equal weights as the way to aggregate all models included in each soup setting. 

• Weight Extrapolation We employ k = 1 when two models, k = 2 when four models, and 

k = 4 when eight models and above. We employ linear extrapolation of model weights with the top and bottom models. 

• Model Swarms We execute the optimization process for 10 iterations, and use 0.2 inertia, 0.3 cognitive coefficient, 0.4 social coefficient, 0.05 repel coefficient, 0.5 step length, and 5 patience epochs in particle swarm optimization. 

## B.2 Experiment Details 

We provide additional details for various experiments and illustrations: 

• Figure 2 : The collection time range is October 2025 to February 2026, where we obtained 61 contributed models. 23 • Figure 3 : We employ the top-32 models based on evaluations on the held-out sets (Section 3), listed in Tables 5 to 7. We report the macro-average performance across datasets in each domain. Most datasets are evaluated with accuracy (of choosing the correct option, outputting the correct final answer; AGIEval, ARC-Challenge, MMLU-redux, BigBench-Hard, GSM8k, MATH, Sciriff, BLEND, TruthfulQA), two knowledge datasets are evaluated by character-level F1-match since there could be a range of possible answers (WikiDYK, PopQA), and three instruction-following datasets are evaluated with reward model scores (specifically Skywork/Skywork-Reward-Llama-3.1-8B-v0.2 ; AlpacaEval, Wildchat, Human Interest). Each horizontal dashed line represents the best performance across all baselines in this group for visual simplicity: if the scaling trend rises above these horizontal lines, it means scaling participation successfully outperforms all non-modular and/or non-monolithic models in this category. 

• Figure 4 : Setting 1 employs the top-8 models in Table 5 in that order. Setting 2 and 3 go down the model list in Tables 5 to 7 to select models in eligible institutions. Setting 4 employs random sampling from the top-32 models. 

• Figure 5 : CultureBench and Kaleidoscope are evaluated with prediction accuracy, the open setting of InfinityChat with reward model Skywork/Skywork-Reward-Llama-3.1-8B-v0.2 , and the diversity setting with the inter-model homogeneity metric [41]. 

• Figure 6 : We provide examples of cases where all 32 models could not individually solve the problem, but a collaborative system could, in Tables 2 to 4. With the collaboration and contribution of multiple models, the ceiling of AI capabilities is greatly improved. 

• Figure 7 : We run Pearson correlation between the individual and compositional strength of the top-8 models in Table 5 and report the correlation coefficient as well as p-value. 

• Figure 8 : Four human evaluators each judged response pairs from their own model and the compositional system, on the original data and priorities where they developed their models for. Each domain consists of 25 human evaluation problems and 100 problems with auto-matic evaluatison (LLM-as-a-judge, reward model), summing up to 100 human judgements and 400 automatic evaluations in total. 24 Question : A concert is given by a six-member band—guitarist, keyboard player, percussionist, sax-ophonist, trumpeter, violinist. During the concert, each member performs exactly one solo. The following restrictions apply: The guitarist does not perform the fourth solo. The percussionist per-forms a solo at some time before the keyboard player does. The keyboard player performs a solo at some time after the violinist does and at some time before the guitarist does. The saxophonist per-forms a solo at some time after either the percussionist does or the trumpeter does, but not both. Which one of the following CANNOT perform the third: A) guitarist B) keyboard player C) saxophonist D) trumpeter E) violinist 

Individual Model Answers : C: 25 models ✗, B: 6 models ✗, E: 1 model ✗

Participatory System Answer : Certainly! Let’s summarize the key points from the detailed analysis: 1. **The guitarist (G) does not perform the fourth solo**: This means the guitarist can perform in positions 1, 2, or 5. 2. **The percussionist (P) performs a solo before the keyboard player (K)**: This means the per-cussionist cannot be in the third position. 3. **The keyboard player (K) performs a solo after the violinist (V) and before the guitarist (G)**: This means the keyboard player cannot be in the third position. 4. **The saxophonist (S) performs a solo after either the percussionist (P) or the trumpet player (T), but not both**: This means the saxophonist can be in positions 3, 4, or 5. Given these constraints, let’s consider each option: - **A) Guitarist (G)**: The guitarist cannot be in the third position because the keyboard player must perform after the violinist and before the guitarist. - **B) Keyboard Player (K)**: The keyboard player cannot be in the third position because the violinist must perform before the keyboard player. - **C) Saxophonist (S)**: The saxophonist can potentially be in the third position if they perform after either the percussionist or the trumpet player. - **D) Trumpeter (T)**: The trumpeter can potentially be in the third position if the saxophonist performs after them. - **E) Violinist (V)**: The violinist can be in the third position as long as the keyboard player performs after them and before the guitarist. Therefore, the only musician who cannot perform the third solo is the **Guitarist (G)**. The correct answer is: **A) Guitarist (G)** ✓ 

> Table 2 Example one of collaborative emergence, where participatory AI solves problems where all 32 modular components fail individually.

25 Question : A maintenance company that takes service requests from three clients—Image, Solide, and Truvest—plans to set targets for its average service response times. Service targets will be set at 3 days, 2 days, or 1 day. Two service targets are set for each client—one for requests received through the maintenance company’s website and one for requests received by voicemail. The six targets are set according to the following conditions: None of the clients can have a website target that is longer than its voicemail target. Image’s voicemail target must be shorter than the other clients’ voicemail targets. Solide’s website target must be shorter than Truvest’s website target. If none of the clients has a website target of 2 days, which one of the following could be true? A) Image’s website target is shorter than Solide’s. B) Solide’s website target is shorter than Image’s. C) Solide’s voicemail target is shorter than Truvest’s. D) Truvest’s website target is shorter than Image’s. E) Truvest’s voicemail target is shorter than Solide’s. 

Individual Model Answers : E: 18 models ✗, B: 11 models ✗, A: 3 models ✗

Participatory System Answer : Certainly! The correct answer is: **C) Solide’s voicemail target is shorter than Truvest’s.** Here’s the detailed reasoning: 1. **Conditions Recap:** - No client’s website target can be longer than its voicemail target. - Image’s voicemail target must be shorter than the other clients’ voicemail targets. - Solide’s website target must be shorter than Truvest’s website target. - None of the clients has a website target of 2 days. 2. **Possible Target Values:** - Website targets can be 1 day or 3 days (since 2 days is not allowed). - Voicemail targets can be 1 day, 2 days, or 3 days. 3. **Assigning Targets:** - Since Image’s voicemail target must be shorter than Solide’s and Truvest’s, Image’s voicemail target can only be 1 day. - This leaves Solide’s and Truvest’s voicemail targets to be 2 days or 3 days. - Given Solide’s website target must be shorter than Truvest’s website target, and neither can have a 2-day website target, we assign: - Truvest’s website target as 3 days. - Solide’s website target as 1 day. - With Truvest’s website target being 3 days, its voicemail target can be either 1 day or 2 days. But since Image already has a 1-day voicemail target, Solide’s voicemail target must be 2 days. - This leaves Truvest with a voicemail target of 3 days. 4. **Final Configuration:** - Image: Website = 3 days, Voicemail = 1 day - Solide: Website = 1 day, Voicemail = 2 days - Truvest: Website = 3 days, Voicemail = 3 days In this configuration, the only statement that holds true is: C) Solide’s voicemail target is shorter than Truvest’s. Therefore, the correct answer is **C) Solide’s voicemail target is shorter than Truvest’s. ✓ 

> Table 3 Example two of collaborative emergence, where participatory AI solves problems where all 32 modular components fail individually.

26 Question : A software company employs exactly seven sales representatives—Kim, Mahr, Parra, Quinn, Stuckey, Tiao, and Udall—to work in its three sales zones—Zone 1, Zone 2, and Zone 3. Each sales representative works in exactly one of the sales zones, in accordance with the following conditions: Either Parra or Tiao (but not both) works in Zone 1. Either Tiao or Udall (but not both) works in Zone 2. Parra and Quinn work in the same sales zone as each other. Stuckey and Udall work in the same sales zone as each other. There are more of the sales representatives working in Zone 3 than in Zone 2. Quinn CANNOT work in the same sales zone as which one of the following? A) Kim B) Mahr C) Stuckey D) Tiao E) Udall 

Individual Model Answers : C: 12 models ✗, E: 11 models ✗, A: 7 models ✗, B: 2 models ✗

Participatory System Answer : Certainly! Here’s the final, comprehensive answer to the question: **The correct answer is D) Tiao.** **Explanation:** Given the conditions: 1. **Zone Assignments:** - Either Parra or Tiao works in Zone 1. - Either Tiao or Udall works in Zone 2. - Parra and Quinn work in the same sales zone. - Stuckey and Udall work in the same sales zone. - There are more sales representatives in Zone 3 than in Zone 2. 2. **Pairing Conditions:** - Parra and Quinn must be in the same sales zone. - Stuckey and Udall must be in the same sales zone. 3. **Zone Distribution:** - Zone 3 must have more representatives than Zone 2. From the conditions, we can deduce the following: - If Tiao is in Zone 1, Udall cannot be there. Therefore, Udall must be in Zone 2 or Zone 3. - If Udall is in Zone 2, Tiao cannot be there. Therefore, Tiao must be in Zone 1 or Zone 3. Since there are more representatives in Zone 3 than in Zone 2, and Tiao and Udall cannot both be in Zone 2, Tiao must be in Zone 3. - If Tiao is in Zone 3, Parra and Quinn must also be in Zone 3 to satisfy the condition that Parra and Quinn work in the same sales zone. - This leaves Stuckey and Udall to be in Zone 2. Now, let’s consider the remaining representatives: - Kim and Mahr must be in Zone 1, as there are only two spots in Zone 1 and Parra and Tiao are already there. Therefore, Quinn cannot work in the same sales zone as Tiao because Tiao is already in Zone 3, and Quinn must be in the same sales zone as Parra, who is also in Zone 3. Thus, the final answer is D) Tiao. ✓ 

> Table 4 Example three of collaborative emergence, where participatory AI solves problems where all 32 modular components fail individually.

27 Table 5 List of the 32 contributed models we employed in Figure 3, part 1. All model names are identifiers on Huggingface, a model sharing platform. Model descriptions are provided by the original contributors. 

ID Model Description Paper 

1 chtmp223/Qwen2.5-7B-CLIPPER We fine-tuned models for the task of narrative claim verification, where the model has to verify whether a claim about a book is True or False given the full book text. [72] 2 chengq9/ToolRL-Qwen2.5-3B The model is trained through RL especially for tool use task, focusing on tool learning, parameter filling, etc. [73] 3 AgentFlow/agentflow-planner-7b The framework directly optimizes planner agent within the system in an online fashion using Flow-based Group Refined Policy Optimization (Flow-GRPO) [74] 4 nanami/ladder-last16L-llama3.1-8binstruct-sft4k-stage2v03-bsize32-rkl8b Finetuned from llama3.1 to test an efficient language model architecture design. Finetuning enables us to test the architecture on a relatively large model while avoiding expensive train-from-scratch; this is very helpful for architecture research that doesn’t deviate too much from the standard Transformer. [75] 5 viswavi/qwen2.5 rlcf This model improves the instruction following capabilities of Qwen-2.5-7B-Instruct using preference tuning on the WildChecklists dataset. This model is described in detail in ”Checklists Are Better Than Reward Models For Aligning Language Models”. [76] 6 milli19/promptmii-llama-3.1-8b-instruct RL trained for ability to induce instructions [77] 7 Zhengping/conditional-probability-regression Estimating conditional probability in everyday scenario [78] 8 yale-nlp/MDCure-Qwen2-7B-Instruct Model post-trained for various multi-document tasks (e.g., QA, summarization, coreference resolution) that achieves notable improvements in multi-document performance over prior pre-trained baselines. Gains generalize robustly across task/content domains, and existing capabilities of the base model are preserved. [79] 9 GritLM/GritLM-7B Generative representational instruction tuned to tackle both generative & embedding tasks. [80] 10 lime-nlp/Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct-SUM10 The model is trained to reason about its own uncertainty and perform abstention when needed. [81] 11 geyang627/care-chinese-gemma2-9b care-chinese-gemma2-9b is based on google/gemma-2-9b-it and further fine-tuned on our CARE, enhancing cultural awareness especially in Chinese. [82] 12 bespokelabs/Bespoke-Stratos-7B The model is trained for efficient LLM hallucination detection [83] 13 kangdawei/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct-GenderNeutral-Finetuned Trained on gender neutral dataset for gender bias mitigation [84] 14 DeepRetrieval/DeepRetrieval-PubMed-3B-Llama The models are trained for rewriting the query for optimized retrieval outcome with BM25 or real search engines (PubMed). More models can be found at https://huggingface.co/DeepRetrieval [85] 15 yale-nlp/MDCure-Qwen2-1.5B-Instruct Model post-trained for various multi-document tasks (e.g., QA, summarization, coreference resolution) that achieves notable improvements in multi-document performance over prior pre-trained baselines. Gains generalize robustly across task/content domains, and existing capabilities of the base model are preserved. [79] 16 Zhaoxuan/PUGC-Mistral-DPO model that aligned with user preferences using preference data souring from user-generated content [86] 

28 Table 6 List of the 32 contributed models we employed in Figure 3, part 2. All model names are identifiers on Huggingface, a model sharing platform. Model descriptions are provided by the original contributors. 

ID Model Description Paper 

17 jwhj/Qwen2.5-Math-1.5B-OREO A model for math reasoning, trained with OREO (offline reasoning optimization) [87] 18 PeterJinGo/SearchR1-nq hotpotqa train-qwen2.5-7b-em-ppo Agentic search [88] 19 gasolsun/DynamicRAG-8B The model is trained as a dynamic reranker agent that can determine the appropriate number and order of the retrieved documents. [89] 20 LLM360/guru-7B A model for general reasoning, trained with GURU dataset [90] 21 spiral-rl/Spiral-Qwen3-4B This model, SPIRAL, is trained on for multi-agent multi-turn settings to perform complex reasoning tasks by self-play in strategic games like Poker and Tic-Tac-Toe. This self-play method enables it to autonomously develop cognitive skills that transfer to broader domains like math and logic. [91] 22 uclanlp/brief-pro It is a universal, lightweight compressor that distills relevant evidence for a given query from retrieved documents into a concise summary for seamless integration into in-context RAG. [92] 23 Rakancorle1/PolicyGuard-4B PolicyGuard-4B is a 4-billion-parameter lightweight guardrail model trained on PolicyGuardBench, a 60k-example benchmark of policy–trajectory pairs across five web domains. It is designed to detect policy violations in autonomous web agent trajectories, including both full-sequence and prefix-based detection tasks, achieving strong accuracy and cross-domain generalization while maintaining efficient inference [93] 24 ReasoningTransferability/ UniReason-Qwen3-14B-RL This model is a RL-GRPO-tuned version of qwen3-14b focused on math-reasoning capabilities. The model was developed as part of research investigating the transferability of mathematical reasoning skills to general language tasks. [94] 25 ypwang61/One-Shot-RLVR-Qwen2.5-Math-1.5B-pi1 Training 1.5B model with one training example to show some features of RL training, like robust to overfitting due to zero-mean advantage, and supports that to a large extent RLVR incentivizes the reasoning capability obtained from pretrain/mid-train stages. [95] 26 sunblaze-ucb/Qwen2.5-3B-Intuitor-MATH-1EPOCH This model is an Intuitor-fine-tuned version of Qwen2.5-3B trained on the MATH dataset. Intuitor is a reinforcement learning method that fine-tunes large language models (LLMs) using self-certainty—the model’s own internal confidence—as the sole reward. It is built on a novel paradigm we call Reinforcement Learning from Internal Feedback (RLIF). [96] 27 yale-nlp/Qwen3-8B-SciLit01 A thinking model trained on Synthetic-1, specialized for scientific/STEM tasks. [97] 28 OpenThoughts/OpenThinker3-7B Open source reasoning model trained on OpenThoughts dataset [98] 29 l3lab/L1-Qwen-1.5B-Exact A series of reasoning models trained using reinforcement learning for length control, i.e user can specify desired output length in prompt and model will adhere to it. All models: https://huggingface.co/collections/l3lab/l1-67cacf4e39c176ca4e9890f4 [99] 

29 Table 7 List of the 32 contributed models we employed in Figure 3, part 3. All model names are identifiers on Huggingface, a model sharing platform. Model descriptions are provided by the original contributors. 

ID Model Description Paper 

30 fangwu97/DeepSearch-1.5B DeepSearch-1.5B is a 1.5B parameter reasoning model trained with Reinforcement Learning with Verifiable Rewards (RLVR), enhanced by Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS). [100] 31 allegrolab/hubble-8b-500b toks-standard-hf The suite of models are fine-tuned from scratch using the Llama architecture. The models are trained on modified datasets to study LLM memorization. The 8B parameter model is trained to 3.7x Chinchilla optimal using 500B tokens. We also release 1B models. [101] 32 fcyin/llama2 7B base lofit truthfulqa This is a Llama-2-7b model fine-tuned on TruthfulQA using Localized Fine-tuning on LLM Representations (LoFiT; https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.01563). This model checkpoint modifies the attention outputs of 96 attention heads (10% of all attention heads). [102] 

30 Table 8 List of other contributed models, part 1. All model names are identifiers on Huggingface, a model sharing platform. Model descriptions are provided by the original contributors. 

ID Model Description Paper 

33 multimodal-reasoning-lab/Bagel-Zebra-CoT The model is trained on our released Zebra-CoT benchmark. [103] 34 dill-lab/oath-frames-flant5-xl Our model was finetuned to classify social media posts with labels for attitudes towards homelessness. [104] 35 tsor13/spectrum-Llama-3.1-8B-v1 Trained for distributional data modeling / steerability [105] 36 lecslab/glosslm This model is trained to take as input transcriptions from a language (and/or free translation) and output interlinear gloss (IGT), a form of linguistic annotation used to study the morphosyntactic patterns of a language. [106] 37 UW/OLMo2-8B-SuperBPE-t180k Trained with SuperBPE tokenizer from scratch to test effect of tokenizer [107] 38 MLLMMU/LLaVA Vanilla We fine-tune a model on our fictitious unlearning benchmark to establish a vanilla baseline for evaluating the effectiveness of different unlearning algorithms. Specifically, these algorithms are applied to the vanilla model, and their performance is compared to assess unlearning quality. [108] 39 ddvd233/QoQ-Med-VL-7B We tuned Qwen2.5 VL on multimodal medical diagnosis data across 2D/3D images, videos and time series. [109] 40 ylu610/FT-T5-3B-Verifier The T5-3B model finetuned on FActScore dataset for the claim verification task. The model is used in our paper: Optimizing Decomposition for Optimal Claim Verification. [110] 41 reasonir/ReasonIR-8B The model is trained for reasoning-intensive retrieval. We performed fine-tuning with a contrastive learning objective based on Llama3.1-8B. Note: The model is a language model but is specially adapted to be used as an embedding model in retrieval tasks, so it may not fit if the scope is strictly a language model for generation tasks. [111] 42 nbalepur/Llama-3.1-8B-PT-DPO-BeaverTails Trained on the BeaverTails dataset to respond to user queries, but also can take in a user persona as an input (e.g. ”I am a vegetarian”) to personalize the response [112] 43 guangyangmusic/legato We train a VLM for optical music recognition, i.e., recognizing music scores from images. The vision encoder is adapted from Llama-3.2-11B-Vision and the text decoder is trained from scratch. [113] 44 Shiyu-Lab/roberta-base-watermark-embed The model is trained to generate text embeddings that are insensitive to semantic-preserving changes but sensitive to semantic-distorting changes. [114] 45 JiaaqiLiu/VIPER-R1-RL The model is trained to generate text embeddings that are insensitive to semantic-preserving changes but sensitive to semantic-distorting changes. [115] 46 l3-unc/qwen2.5-7b edited fact check v2 These models are knowledge edited models using MEMIT to generate counterfactuals models for faithfulness metric meta-evaluation. [116] 47 Jennny/llama3 8b helpful rm full The models are trained as Bradley-Terry reward models on top of a SFT meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B model to provide reward scores across helpfulness, honesty, and truthfulness dimensions. [117] 48 KaiserWhoLearns/ PTvsSFT OLMo1b This is the model checkpoint release for Amuro & Char: Analyzing the Relationship between Pre-Training and Fine-Tuning of Large Language Models, each model checkpoint is fine-tuned for one task. [118] 

31 Table 9 List of other contributed models, part 2. All model names are identifiers on Huggingface, a model sharing platform. Model descriptions are provided by the original contributors. 

ID Model Description Paper 

49 LMMs-Lab-Turtle/SelfRewarded-R1-7B A model trained specialized for generating visual caption before generating the final answer. [119] 50 allenai/OLMo-2-0325-32B-Instruct Pretrained on 6 trillion tokens of web text, academic papers, code, math-heavy content, and more. Instruction tuned on Tulu 3 data, including for general SFT, DPO, RLVR. [120] 51 yale-nlp/MDCureRM This is a quality scoring model for multi-document post-training data. It can be used in a RM-as-a-Judge fashion to determine the training utility of a particular multi-document QA sample; scoring is based on a predefined rubric with 6 criteria. [79] 52 yale-nlp/MDCure-LLAMA3.1-8B-Instruct Post-training adaptation of Llama3.1-8B-Instruct for various multi-document tasks (e.g., QA, summarization, coreference resolution) that achieves notable improvements in multi-document performance over prior pre-trained baselines. Gains generalize robustly across task/content domains. [79] 53 izzcw/minecollab filtered crafting I trained the model to collaborate better in long context embodied tasks (e.g. Minecraft) by using tools and learning to share information. [121] 54 kkkevinkkk/Llama-3-8B-CR-DPO This is trained to resolve knowledge conflicts between contextual knowledge and parametric knowledge in the RAG set-up. [122] 55 chentong00/Qwen3-8B-GRPO-Binary-RAR The model is finetuned on Qwen3-8B to reduce extrinsic hallucination. We use RL (GRPO) with a binary retrieval-augmented reward and train on the chentong00/binary-rar-wildchat-8k dataset. [123] 56 Shiyu-Lab/HarnessLLM RL Qwen3 4B The model was trained with RL for automatic test cases generation. [124] 57 CNCL-Penn-State/CrPO-llama-3.1-8b-instruct-cre The model is optimized for better output creativity. [125] 58 hkust-nlp/drkernel-14b Triton Kernel Generations [126] 59 visual-ds/distilbert-base-uncased-hatexplain The rationales of the HateXplain dataset contain words not included in the original ‘distilbert-base-uncased‘ model’s vocabulary because they are offensive and hate speech words. However, when training a model to incorporate rationales, including these tokens in the vocabulary may be important. Otherwise, the results would be underestimated. In the train portion of the dataset, we filtered the most popular out-of-vocabulary tokens (those with more than ten occurrences), added them to the models’ vocabularies, and fine-tuned the model in this portion. We used a masked language modeling probability of 0.15 with a batch size of 8 for 15 epochs in a GPU NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1070. [127] 60 oaimli/qwen sft scitrek We fine-tuned Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct-1M on our constructed dataset SciTrek (https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.21028), to improve the performance on long-context numerical reasoning over scientific articles. [128] 61 bkhmsi/micro-llama-1b We partition the layers of a pretrained language model into four expert modules aligned with well-studied cognitive networks in the human brain. The result is a more interpretable and steerable model that is more aligned to human behavior without sacrificing performance on reasoning benchmarks. [129] 

32